                                                                  Learning and Evaluating
                                                                General Linguistic Intelligence

                                                 Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Jerome Connor,
                                                      Tomas Kocisky, Mike Chrzanowski, Lingpeng Kong,
                                                Angeliki Lazaridou, Wang Ling, Lei Yu, Chris Dyer, Phil Blunsom
                                                              DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
                                             {dyogatama,cyprien,jeromeconnor,tkocisky,chrzanowskim}@google.com
                                               {lingpenk,angeliki,lingwang,leiyu,cdyer,pblunsom}@google.com




arXiv:1901.11373v1 [cs.LG] 31 Jan 2019
                                                                                          Abstract
                                                   We define general linguistic intelligence as the ability to reuse previously acquired knowl-
                                               edge about a language’s lexicon, syntax, semantics, and pragmatic conventions to adapt to new
                                               tasks quickly. Using this definition, we analyze state-of-the-art natural language understand-
                                               ing models and conduct an extensive empirical investigation to evaluate them against these
                                               criteria through a series of experiments that assess the task-independence of the knowledge
                                               being acquired by the learning process. In addition to task performance, we propose a new
                                               evaluation metric based on an online encoding of the test data that quantifies how quickly
                                               an existing agent (model) learns a new task. Our results show that while the field has made
                                               impressive progress in terms of model architectures that generalize to many tasks, these models
                                               still require a lot of in-domain training examples (e.g., for fine tuning, training task-specific
                                               modules), and are prone to catastrophic forgetting. Moreover, we find that far from solving
                                               general tasks (e.g., document question answering), our models are overfitting to the quirks of
                                               particular datasets (e.g., SQuAD). We discuss missing components and conjecture on how to
                                               make progress toward general linguistic intelligence.



                                         1    Introduction
                                         Advances in deep learning techniques (e.g., attention mechanisms, memory modules, and
                                         architecture search) have considerably improved natural language processing (NLP) models on
                                         many important tasks. For example, machine performance on both Chinese–English machine
                                         translation and document question answering on the Stanford question answering dataset
                                         (SQuAD; Rajpurkar et al., 2016) has been claimed to have surpassed human levels (Hassan
                                         et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018). While the tasks that initiated learning-based NLP models were
                                         motivated by external demands and are important applications in their own right (e.g., machine
                                         translation, question answering, automatic speech recognition, text to speech, etc.), there is a
                                         marked and troubling tendency for recent datasets to be set up to be easy to solve with little in
                                         the way of generalization or abstraction; for instance, ever larger datasets created by crowd-sourcing
                                         processes that may not well approximate the natural distributions they are intended to span,
                                         although there are some notable counter-examples (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). When there exist
                                         multiple datasets that are representative of the exact same task from different domains (e.g.,
                                         various question answering datasets), we rarely evaluate on all of them. This state of affairs
                                         promotes development of models that only work well for a specific purpose, overestimates our
                                         success at having solved the general task, fails to reward sample efficient generalization that
                                         requires the ability to discover and make use of rich linguistic structures, and ultimately limits
                                         progress.


                                                                                              1
    Despite these methodological difficulties, recent breakthroughs demonstrate that models that
are pretrained on a large unlabeled corpus perform well on many language understanding tasks
with minimal modifications (Radford et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018). These
models are trained on a large corpus in an unsupervised fashion on tasks such as language
modeling (predicting the next word given a context), masked language modeling (predicting a
missing word in a sentence from the context), and next sentence predictions (predicting whether
two sentences are consecutive sentences). The models can then be used on various NLP tasks
by adding an extra task-specific final layer and fine tuning on supervised data for the task of
interest. Variants of these models achieve impressive results on the GLUE benchmark (sentence
and sentence pair classification tasks; Wang et al., 2018) and the SQuAD question answering
dataset, showing the clear benefit of, and significant progress on, transfer learning in NLP.
    Another promising avenue is to train a model on multiple tasks simultaneously. McCann et al.
(2018) train a question-answering language model on many different NLP tasks (e.g., machine
translation, summarization, sentiment analysis, etc.) by formulating every task as question
answering in order to make the input and output of the model be consistent. This model can
then be used to perform multiple tasks by asking different questions at test time. While their
overall multitask results are still below task-specific models, it represents a prototype for models
of general linguistic intelligence.
    In order to make progress toward models that manifest general linguistic intelligence, we
argue for an evaluation paradigm that rewards abilities to (i) deal with the full complexity
of natural language across a variety of tasks, (ii) effectively store and reuse representations,
combinatorial modules (e.g, which compose words into representations of phrases, sentences,
and documents), and previously acquired linguistic knowledge to avoid catastrophic forgetting
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999), and (iii) adapt to new linguistic tasks in new environ-
ments with little experience (i.e., robustness to domain shifts). This is inspired by the evolving
artificial general intelligence task suites that are used to develop generic exploration, planning,
and reasoning abilities in agents that learn to interact with simulated visual environments (Beattie
et al., 2016; Brockman et al., 2016). Here, we focus on language processing modules that learn
using primarily supervised and unsupervised methods from static corpora. We leave extensions
to learning through interactions with simulated linguistic environments to future work.
    In this paper we analyze the capabilities of previously proposed algorithms as models of
general linguistic intelligence. To directly quantify how quickly an existing model adapts to a
new task we propose a new evaluation metric (§4) based on online (prequential) coding (Blier &
Ollivier, 2018). This evaluation considers the number of task-specific training examples needed to
reach high performance, thus rewarding sample efficiency. Our experiments show that existing
models still require considerable fine tuning on each task before they perform well (§5.1), and
although they significantly benefit from transfer learning on other datasets from related tasks
(§5.2), they generalize poorly to different datasets from the same task without fine tuning (§5.3),
and suffer from catastrophic forgetting when trained on multiple datasets and tasks in a continual
learning setup (§5.4). We discuss the implications of our findings and conclude by outlining
potential directions toward general linguistic intelligence models (§6).


2     Tasks
In this section, we describe the tasks and datasets that we consider in our experiments. We
evaluate many of our models on two main tasks: reading comprehension on SQuAD 1.11
    1 https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/




                                                    2
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and Multi Genre Natural Language Inference (MNLI2 ; Williams et al.,
2018). However, we also use the following tasks and datasets for training and evaluation (e.g., in
a multitask setup, for pretraining, and for evaluation on out-of-domain genre).

Reading Comprehension. We use two additional reading comprehension datasets: TriviaQA3
(Joshi et al., 2017) and QuAC4 (Choi et al., 2018) in our experiments. While SQuAD 1.1, TriviaQA,
and QuAC are from the same task, they have different characteristics. SQuAD1.1 is a reading
comprehension dataset constructed from Wikipedia articles. It includes almost 90,000 training
examples and 10,000 validation examples. TriviaQA is a dataset with question-answer pairs
written by trivia enthusiasts and evidence collected retrospectively from Wikipedia and the web.
We use the Web section of TriviaQA that contains 76,000 training examples and 300 verified
validation examples. QuAC is an information-seeking dialog-style dataset where a student asks
questions about a Wikipedia article and a teacher answers with a short excerpt from the article.
It has 80,000 training examples and approximately 7,000 validation examples.

Semantic Role Labeling. We consider a question-answer driven semantic role labeling task
from FitzGerald et al. (2018), where semantic role labeling is presented as a span prediction
problem. Given a sentence and a predicate-driven wh-question, the goal is to predict the start
and end indices of the answer in the sentence. There are around 200,000 training questions and
25,000 test questions in the dataset.5

Relation Extraction. Relation extraction is the task of extracting factual knowledge from a
corpus. Levy et al. (2017) show that it can be formulated as a question answering problem by
associating questions with relation slots. We use their zero-shot relation extraction dataset6
which consists of over 900,000 training examples and almost 5,000 test examples.

Natural Language Inference Natural language inference is a sentence pair classification prob-
lem where the goal is to predict relationships between two sentences from entail, contradict,
and neutral. In addition to the MNLI dataset, we also use the Stanford Natural Language
Inference (SNLI7 ; Bowman et al., 2015) dataset. MNLI (SNLI) contains 400,000 (550,000) training
pairs and 20,000 (10,000) test pairs respectively.


3     Models
We focus on two classes of models: self-attention models (i.e., Transformer; Vaswani et al., 2017)
and recurrent neural networks.
    For self-attention models, we start from a pretrained BERT model (Devlin et al., 2018),8
which has been shown to be state-of-the-art on many natural language processing tasks. BERT
is a big Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) which is trained on two unsupervised tasks:
masked language modeling and next sentence prediction. Devlin et al. (2018) also show that
these unsupervised pretraining tasks result in better models compared to the standard language
modeling task (i.e., next word prediction). We use the BERTbase model which has 12 Transformer
    2 https://www.nyu.edu/projects/bowman/multinli/
    3 http://nlp.cs.washington.edu/triviaqa/
    4 http://quac.ai/
    5 http://qasrl.org/
    6 http://nlp.cs.washington.edu/zeroshot/
    7 https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/snli/
    8 https://github.com/google-research/bert




                                                      3
