                                         Linearized Relative Positional Encoding

                                         2
                                             Zhen Qin 2,3 Weixuan Sun 2 Kaiyue Lu 4 Hui Deng                      3
                                                                                                                      Dongxu Li   2
                                                                                                                                      Xiaodong Han
                                         4
                                             Yuchao Dai 5 Lingpeng Kong 1,2 Yiran Zhong∗
                                         1                               2                3
                                             Shanghai AI Laboratory        OpenNLPLab       Australian National University
                                         4                                          5
                                             Northwestern Polytechnical University    The University of Hong Kong



                                                                                                 Abstract




arXiv:2307.09270v1 [cs.CL] 18 Jul 2023
                                                    Relative positional encoding is widely used in vanilla and linear transformers to repre-
                                                    sent positional information. However, existing encoding methods of a vanilla transformer
                                                    are not always directly applicable to a linear transformer, because the latter requires a
                                                    decomposition of the query and key representations into separate kernel functions. Never-
                                                    theless, principles for designing encoding methods suitable for linear transformers remain
                                                    understudied. In this work, we put together a variety of existing linear relative positional
                                                    encoding approaches under a canonical form and further propose a family of linear rela-
                                                    tive positional encoding algorithms via unitary transformation. Our formulation leads to a
                                                    principled framework that can be used to develop new relative positional encoding methods
                                                    that preserve linear space-time complexity. Equipped with different models, the proposed
                                                    linearized relative positional encoding (LRPE) family derives effective encoding for vari-
                                                    ous applications. Experiments show that compared with existing methods, LRPE achieves
                                                    state-of-the-art performance in language modeling, text classification, and image classifi-
                                                    cation. Meanwhile, it emphasizes a general paradigm for designing broadly more relative
                                                    positional encoding methods that are applicable to linear transformers. The code is available
                                                    at https://github.com/OpenNLPLab/Lrpe.


                                         1      Introduction
                                         Transformers have achieved remarkable progress in natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford
                                         et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Arnab et al., 2021)
                                         and audio processing (Karita et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Gulati et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022). As an
                                         important ingredient in transformers, positional encoding assigns a unique representation for each position of
                                         a token in a sequence so that the transformers can break the permutation invariance property. Among these
                                         encoding methods, absolute positional encoding (Vaswani et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015; Devlin et al.,
                                         2019; Liu et al., 2020) maps each individual position index into a continuous encoding. Whereas relative
                                         positional encoding (Shaw et al., 2018; Su et al., 2021; Horn et al., 2021; Liutkus et al., 2021; Huang et al.,
                                         2020; Raffel et al., 2019) generates encoding for each query-key pair, representing their relative positional
                                         offset. We focus on relative positional encoding as they are not constrained by input lengths (Chen, 2021)
                                         while showing superior performance (Shaw et al., 2018).
                                         Linear transformers (Chen, 2021; Qin et al., 2022b;a; Liu et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022) attract more attention
                                         recently as they can achieve linear space-time complexity with respect to input sequence length while main-
                                         taining comparable performance with vanilla transformers. Most existing linear transformers use absolute
                                         positional encoding methods to encode positional information, since most existing relative positional encod-
                                         ing methods are designed for vanilla transformers and are not directly applicable to linear transformers. The
                                         main cause behind this limitation is that linear transformers decompose key and value representations in
                                         the self-attention modules into separate kernel functions to achieve linear space-time complexity. Such an
                                         additional requirement on the decomposibility is not always satisfied by existing relative positional encoding
                                         methods. On the other hand, despite some individual works (Qin et al., 2022b; Chen, 2021), general princi-
                                         ples for designing relative positional encoding for linear transformers remain largely understudied. A recent
                                              ∗ Indicates the corresponding author. Email: zhongyiran@gmail.com




                                                                                                      1
               Softmax
      d                                                 d


 n         ×   d*d    ×               ×             n       ×            ×           ×              ×
                                                                d*d          d*d

               𝑤𝑡−𝑠                                              𝑤𝑡            𝑤𝑠
     Q                       KT            V            Q                                   KT           V

          O(n2d + n2d)≈O(n2)                                             O(nd2 + nd2 )≈O(n)
Figure 1: Illustration of existing relative positional encoding (left) and the proposed LRPE (right). Q, K,
and V are all in the shape of n by d, where n is input length and d is feature dimension. Tensors in the
same dashed line box are associated for computation. In the vanilla relative positional encoding, query key
attention has to be calculated first, leading to a quadratic complexity. Wt−s refers to relative positional
encoding, where t, s are two positional indices on the query and key, respectively. Our LRPE achieves a
decomposable encoding, i.e., Wt and Ws are only dependent on positions of the query and key, making
it fully compatible with linear transformers. When dealing with long sequences, d ≪ n, the computation
complexity is dominated by n, rendering d negligible.



work, RoPE Su et al. (2021) proposes a new set of multiplicative encoding solutions based on rotational
positional encoding and can be applied to linear transformers. In Appendix D.1, we show that RoPE can
be seen as a special form of LRPE.
In this work, we aim to bridge this gap and study the principal framework to develop relative positional
encoding applicable to linear transformers. To this end, we start by presenting a canonical form of relative
positional encoding, which reveals that differences in existing encoding methods boil down to choices of
a set of query, key, and relative positional matrix primitives. By properly selecting and composing these
primitives, we could derive various existing encoding methods for transformers.
Taking advantage of the canonical form, we introduce the main contribution of our work, i.e., a special family
of relative positional encoding methods called linearized relative positional encoding (LRPE). Specifically, we
supply a sufficient condition for designing compatible encoding methods, especially for linear transformers,
and prove that the linearized relative positional encoding is a unitary transformation. The benefits of using
unitary transformation are twofold. On one side, since it is derived from the decomposable positional matrix,
it can maintain the linear space-time complexity as shown in Fig. 1. Second, the unitary transformation
property allows us to effectively derive the family of closed-form solutions. In particular, we show that a
number of encoding methods pertain to the LRPE family, including those used in RoPE (Su et al., 2021)
and PermuteFormer (Chen, 2021).
Furthermore, LRPE sheds light on a simple yet flexible theoretical paradigm to develop new effective rela-
tive positional encoding. To demonstrate this, we derive non-exhaustively three additional LRPE encoding
methods by parameterizing the generic solution differently, including solutions living in either real or complex
domains. Since unitary transformations are special cases of a relative positional matrix, LRPE is applicable
to linear transformers and exclusively suitable within encoder and/or decoder layers. We experimentally
demonstrate the effectiveness of the LRPE family on autoregressive and bidirectional language modeling,
text classification, and image classification. Results show that LRPE achieves superior capability in repre-
senting relative positional information, commonly resulting in unrivaled performance than previous encoding
methods.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
     • We present a canonical form of relative positional encoding, which derives most existing relative
       positional encoding methods as its special case, including those used in linear transformers.
     • Based on the canonical form, we propose linearized relative position encoding (LRPE), a simple yet
       principal formulation to derive an encoding family that respects the linear space-time complexity


                                                        2
        in linear transformers. We show several existing relative positional encoding methods in linear
        transformers are in LRPE family. We also provide additional solutions from this generic form.
      • Experiments on various downstream tasks, such as language modeling, text classification, and image
        classification show that the LRPE family is more robust and consistently produces better results
        across tasks than previous relative encoding methods, are flexible in being plugged into encoder
        and/or decoder layers in linear models. In addition, it is generic to derive existing and potentially
        new encoding methods.

2     Background and Preliminary

In this section, we provide preliminary knowledge and describe related work to facilitate the rest discussions.
In the following, we denote the k-th row of matrix M as mTk , the d-dimensional identity matrix as Id . We
omit the subscript d when it is unambiguous from the context. The complete list of notations can be found
in Appendix A.

2.1   Transformer and its linearization

We first briefly review vanilla transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and its linearization (Katharopoulos et al.,
2020). The key component of transformer models is the self-attention block, which involves three matrices
Q (Query), K (Key) and V(Value); each of them is a linear projection taking X ∈ Rn×d as input:

                                 Q = XWQ , K = XWK , V = XWV ∈ Rn×d .                                         (1)

The output O ∈ Rn×d is computed using the Softmax weighted sum:
                                                      √
                                   O = Softmax(QKT / d)V.                                                     (2)

The computation overhead of the vanilla transformer grows quadratically with respect to the sequence length
n, which becomes the bottleneck for transformers to handle long input sequences. Linearization of self-
attention aims to reduce the computation complexity to linear (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Ke et al., 2021;
Qin et al., 2022b; Vyas et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2021; Sun et al., 5555), typically achieved
                                                   ¯
via a decomposable kernel function ϕ : Rd → Rd . Specifically, the output of linear attention is computed as:

                                          O = ∆−1 ϕ(Q)[ϕ(K)T V],
                                                                                                              (3)
                                          ∆ = diag(ϕ(Q)[ϕ(K)T 1n ]).

The key property of linear attention is the decomposability of the kernel function. This enables to compute
ϕ(K)T V ∈ Rd×d first, which leads to the O(nd2 ) complexity, further reducing to O(n) with longer inputs
(d ≪ n). See Appendix B for a detailed discussion.

2.2   Positional encoding

Self-attention is capable of parallel sequence processing but cannot capture positional information of each
token. To address this issue, positional encoding methods are proposed, which can be generally categorized
into two groups: absolute positional encoding and relative positional encoding.
Absolute positional encoding employs handcraft functions (Vaswani et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015)
or learnable encoding lookup tables P ∈ Rn×d (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020) to represent position
indices as encodings. These encodings are then combined with the context vector additively:

                                   qs = WQ (xs + ps ), ks = WK (xs + ps ),
                                                                                                              (4)
                                              vs = WV (xs + ps ),

where the encoding formulation only depends on the absolute position index s, and the positional encoding
size is restricted by the input sequence length.


                                                        3
