                                                      C O NT: Contrastive Neural Text Generation


                                            Chenxin An1,2∗, Jiangtao Feng2 , Kai Lv1 , Lingpeng Kong2,3 , Xipeng Qiu1 , Xuanjing Huang1,4
                                                                1
                                                                  Fudan University, 2 Shark-NLP Shanghai AI Laboratory
                                                                             3
                                                                               The University of Hong Kong
                                                     4
                                                       Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
                                                                {cxan20, klv21, xpqiu, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
                                                                   fengjiangtao@pjlab.org.cn, lpk@cs.hku.hk




arXiv:2205.14690v4 [cs.CL] 3 Feb 2023
                                                                                          Abstract
                                                      Recently, contrastive learning attracts increasing interests in neural text generation
                                                      as a new solution to alleviate the exposure bias problem. It introduces a sequence-
                                                      level training signal which is crucial to generation tasks that always rely on auto-
                                                      regressive decoding. However, previous methods using contrastive learning in
                                                      neural text generation usually lead to inferior performance. In this paper, we analyse
                                                      the underlying reasons and propose a new Contrastive Neural Text generation
                                                      framework, C O NT. C O NT addresses bottlenecks that prevent contrastive learning
                                                      from being widely adopted in generation tasks from three aspects – the construction
                                                      of contrastive examples, the choice of the contrastive loss, and the strategy in
                                                      decoding. We validate C O NT on five generation tasks with ten benchmarks,
                                                      including machine translation, summarization, code comment generation, data-
                                                      to-text generation and commonsense generation. Experimental results show that
                                                      C O NT clearly outperforms the conventional training framework on all the ten
                                                      benchmarks with a convincing margin. Especially, C O NT surpasses previous the
                                                      most competitive contrastive learning method for text generation, by 1.50 BLEU
                                                      on machine translation and 1.77 ROUGE-1 on summarization, respectively. It
                                                      achieves new state-of-the-art on summarization, code comment generation (without
                                                      external data) and data-to-text generation. 2


                                        1        Introduction
                                        Contrastive learning has achieved great success in representation learning [6, 44, 45]. It also attracts
                                        enormous interests in neural text generation recently. By creating positive and negative examples in
                                        response to unseen (or erroneous) inputs [23], contrastive learning offers a new solution to alleviate
                                        the exposure bias problem [3, 35] – an autoregressive model trained only using the ground truths
                                        exhibits inferior generalization performance. Apart from that, contrastive learning also introduces a
                                        sequence-level loss in addition to the conventional token-level language model loss with maximum
                                        likelihood estimation (MLE). This is crucial to most conditional text generation tasks (e.g., machine
                                        translation and summarization) which are evaluated on sequence-level metrics (e.g., BLEU [32]).
                                        However, it is non-trivial to get contrastive learning working on neural text generation. If we simply
                                        use from-batch positive-negative samples following simCLR [6], and adopt the InfoNCE loss [13, 45]
                                        which ignores the difference between negative samples (§2.2; Naive CL), the improvement over
                                        non-contrastive baselines on generation tasks is rather marginal. Previous work attempts to build
                                        better contrastive samples by disturbing the ground truth [10, 23, 30] in the discrete space or the
                                        continuous embedding space, but when it comes to text generation tasks, their performance gains are
                                        still far from satisfactory.
                                             ∗
                                                 This work was done during Chenxin An’s internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory
                                             2
                                                 The code is available at https://github.com/Shark-NLP/CoNT


                                        36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
                                                                                                            Ground truth
                                      Ground truth                                                 <bos> leave that up to us
                               <bos> leave that up to us




                                                                                                                                       self-generated samples
                                                                                                       <bos> leave that quiet to us
                                                                  Encoder-Decoder



      from-batch samples
                                  <bos> um , my brand ?
                                                                                                   <bos> leave that quiet down

                                <bos> this is frightening                                              <bos> let's take that quietly

                              <bos> they sell certificates       überlassen sie das ruhig uns              from-batch samples

                           Decoder input of naive method                Encoder input                  Decoder input of our method

Figure 1: A case study from IWSLT’14 De-En translation task. The naive setting uses from-batch
samples following SimCLR [6]. Compared with the naive method, C O NT both incorporates self-
generated samples and from-batch samples. The border color indicates the acutual distance between
the ground truth and the contrastive example.


In this work, we propose a new contrastive neural text generation framework, C O NT. C O NT does
three different things from previous frameworks that make suboptimal use of contrastive learning.
First, C O NT samples contrastive examples from its own predictions (e.g., through beam search
algorithm). This training procedure exposes the model to its mistakes in the inference stage and
effectively alleviate the exposure bias problem. We show a comparison between negative samples
in C O NT and in Naive CL in Figure 1. Second, we use a N-pairs contrastive loss which gives a
fine-grained treatment to the contrastive examples based on their sequence-level scores (e.g., BLEU).
It allows the model to fully leverage the supervision from the ground truth example (and its own
generated examples) to learn a better sequence-level distance function between the source and the
target representation. Third, we directly incorporate the learned sequence similarity score from the
distance function into the inference stage. This helps the model to find a better global configuration,
than merely follows the language model likelihood objective in decoding.
We validate C O NT on various important conditional language generation tasks (§4.2), including
machine translation, summarization, code comment generation, data-to-text generation, and common-
sense generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that C O NT greatly improve the conventional
MLE baselines and significantly outperforms all previous contrastive generation models. C O NT
establishes new state-of-the-art results on summarization, code comment generation (without external
data), and data-to-text generation. Particularly, on data-to-text generation and commonsense gen-
eration, C O NT achieves on-par performance with the powerful large pre-trained models: T5-large,
T5-3B [36] with only the base version of T5 while maintaining the efficiency of lightweight models.

2     Background
2.1       Neural Conditional Text Generation

A neural sequence-to-sequence model [43] M = (f, g) generates the target sequence conditioning
on a source sequence, where f and g denote the encoder and decoder, respectively. It is typically
trained using the language model objective with the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). Given
a source sequence x = {xi }M                                     N
                            i=0 and its target sequence y = {yi }i=0 , we minimize the following
negative log likelihood (NLL) loss:
                                                                        N
                                                                        X
                                                             LNLL = −         log pθ (yt |x, y <t ).                                                            (1)
                                                                        t=1

At training stage, it predict the next word based on previous ground truth input y <t ∈ y, but at
inference stage, tokens of y <t are predicted by itself, this introduces the exposure bias.

2.2       Naive Contrastive Learning for Text Generation

Contrastive text generation introduces a contrastive term in addition to the original NLL loss. In
Naive CL, we simply follows SimCLR [6] and use from-batch negative samples B in the InfoNCE
loss [13, 45]:


                                                                               2
                                                                             from-batch samples

                Decoder                     zy       zy                zB      Training obj           Decoding obj

                                                                                                            sim=0.37
                                                                                                     zy'
         <bos> leave that up to us                                                                                zx
                                                                                 pair-wise
                                                     zy''              zy'    contrastive loss       zy''   sim=0.23
                Encoder                     zx
                                                       <bos> leave that quiet to us, p =0.48      score= 0.48 + 0.37


        überlassen sie das ruhig uns                   <bos> let's take that quietly, p =0.53     score= 0.53 + 0.23
                                       beam search
                                                        zy'     zy''
Figure 2: An overview of C O NT. zx , zy is the representation of source sequence x and its target
sequence y. y 0 and y 00 with their representations zy0 , zy00 are returned by beam search algorithm.
The feature representations come from pooling the output of the encoder (source sequence) or decoder
(target sequence). Our training objective is obtained by comparing by all contrastive samples in pair.
The decoding objective not only considers the likelihood of each sequence, but also the sequence
similarity score modeled in training.



                                                              exp(cos(zx , zy )/τ )
                                   LNCE = − log P                                       ,                              (2)
                                                                 exp(cos(zx , zy0 )/τ )
                                                            y 0 ∈B

where zx , zy , zy0 ∈ Rd denote the vector representation of input x, ground truth y and negative
sample y 0 ∈ B, respectively. τ is the temperature and cos(·, ·) defines the cosine similarity. Intuitively,
the contrastive loss LNCE seeks to learn a similarity function that drives the distance between the
source sequence representation zx and its ground-truth target sequence representation zy closer.

3     Method
In this section, we present our new contrastive neural text generation framework, C O NT . C O NT ad-
vances the Naive CL (§2.2) in three aspects. First, C O NT uses negative examples from its own
predictions (§3.1) to construct the set B. Second, C O NT replaces the InfoNCE loss (Eq.2) with a
N-pairs contrastive loss (Eq.3) which leverages a finer-grained supervision given by the the sequence-
level scores of all pairs (§3.2). Third, C O NT incorporates the learned similarity function into its
inference score directly (§3.3). An overview of our approach can be found in Figure 2.

3.1   Contrastive Examples from Predictions

Instead of only using contrastive examples from the same batch [6], we propose to add new contrastive
examples from the model’s own predictions. Kalkstein et al. [18] point that using diverse contrastive
samples helps the generalization ability of the model. Therefore, we use the diverse beam search
algorithm [49] to create contrastive examples from the top-K list of the model’s lastest predictions and
then append them to the from-batch samples to form the contrastive examples. A warm-up stage where
the model is only supervised by LNLL is recommended as it guarantees the quality of the examples
from the model’s prediction. These self-generated contrastive examples alleviate the model’s exposure
bias. Besides, with the model’s performance improving gradually, this approach creates high-quality
hard negative examples that is known to be important in contrastive learning [16, 37].

3.2   N-Pairs Contrastive Loss

One major drawback of the InfoNCE loss is that it has the same treatment for all negative samples. In
text generation, this means that the relative difference between the ground truth and the contrastive
examples is ignored, while this can be easily quantified using a sequence level score (e.g. BLEU) and
the quality of these contrastive examples varies. To mitigate this problem, we propose to employ a
pair-wise margin loss. We first rank all the contrastive examples based on an oracle function o(·, y),
which computes a sequence-level score with the ground truth y. Given a input sequence x, the
ground truth y, and a set of K contrastive samples B = {y 1 , y 2 , · · · , y K }, we can create a series


                                                                 3
