                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




                                         COS F ORMER : R ETHINKING S OFTMAX IN ATTENTION
                                             1
                                               Zhen Qin† 1,3 Weixuan Sun† 1,4 Hui Deng† 3 Dongxu Li 1 Yunshen Wei 1 Baohong Lv
                                             1
                                               Junjie Yan 2,5 Lingpeng Kong 1,2 Yiran Zhong∗
                                             1                         2                            3
                                               SenseTime Research        Shanghai AI Laboratory       Australian National University
                                             4                                         5
                                               Northwestern Polytechnical University     The University of Hong Kong
                                              {lastnamefirstname}@sensetime.com,lpk@cs.hku.hk



                                                                                                                         A BSTRACT




arXiv:2202.08791v1 [cs.CL] 17 Feb 2022
                                                      Transformer has shown great successes in natural language processing, computer
                                                      vision, and audio processing. As one of its core components, the softmax atten-
                                                      tion helps to capture long-range dependencies yet prohibits its scale-up due to the
                                                      quadratic space and time complexity to the sequence length. Kernel methods are
                                                      often adopted to reduce the complexity by approximating the softmax operator.
                                                      Nevertheless, due to the approximation errors, their performances vary in differ-
                                                      ent tasks/corpus and suffer crucial performance drops when compared with the
                                                      vanilla softmax attention. In this paper, we propose a linear transformer called
                                                      COS F ORMER that can achieve comparable or better accuracy to the vanilla trans-
                                                      former in both casual and cross attentions. COS F ORMER is based on two key
                                                      properties of softmax attention: i). non-negativeness of the attention matrix; ii).
                                                      a non-linear re-weighting scheme that can concentrate the distribution of the at-
                                                      tention matrix. As its linear substitute, COS F ORMER fulfills these properties with
                                                      a linear operator and a cosine-based distance re-weighting mechanism. Extensive
                                                      experiments on language modeling and text understanding tasks demonstrate the
                                                      effectiveness of our method. We further examine our method on long sequences
                                                      and achieve state-of-the-art performance on the Long-Range Arena benchmark.
                                                      The source code is available at COS F ORMER .


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION

                                                                                       56
                                                                                                 BigBird
                                                                                                                                                      cosFormer
                                                                                                           Transformer
                                                                                       54




                                                              Long-Range Arena Score
                                                                                                    Longformer
                                                                                                  Synthesizer                                                    Linformer
                                                                                       52
                                                                                                                              Sinkhorn Transformer
                                                                                                                               Reformer                               Performer
                                                                                       50        Sparse Transformer
                                                                                                                                                           Linear Transformer

                                                                                       48


                                                                                       46                                                            Local attention
                                                                                            20              30           40         50               60                70
                                                                                     Speed (examples per sec)
                                         Figure 1: Performance (y axis), speed (x axis), and memory footprint (circle sizes) of efficient transformers
                                         on the Long-Range Arena benchmark. The proposed COS F ORMER achieves an all-around supremacy over
                                         competing methods in the top left quadrant.

                                         With years of development, the transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017) and its variants (Zaheer
                                         et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2020a) have been successfully adapted to three most
                                         popular artificial intelligence (AI) fields: i.e., natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019;
                                         Liu et al., 2019), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Carion et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021)
                                         and audio processing (Schneider et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020). Compared with conventional
                                             ∗
                                                 Indicates the corresponding author. † Indicates equal contribution.


                                                                                                                               1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




recurrent (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and convolutional architectures (He et al., 2016),
transformer-based architectures are generally more scalable to data volumes (Brown et al., 2020)
and stronger in capturing global information with less inductive bias, thus excelling on many tasks.
Dot-product attention with softmax normalization is the cornerstone of the transformer to capture
long-range dependencies. However, its quadratic space and time complexity with regard to the
length of the sequence make its computational overhead prohibitive, especially for long inputs. To
address this issue, numerous methods are proposed recently, such as the sparse attention matrix (Za-
heer et al., 2020; Beltagy et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2020a; Kitaev et al., 2019; Child et al., 2019),low-
rank representations (Wang et al., 2020) or kernel-based methods (Peng et al., 2020; Choromanski
et al., 2020; Katharopoulos et al., 2020), among many others. These methods achieve reduced
computational complexity with comparable performances when compared with the vanilla attention
architecture on several selected tasks or corpus.
However, the improved efficiency is usually achieved via introducing additional yet often impracti-
cal assumptions on the attention matrix (Wang et al., 2020) or with valid approximation of softmax
operation only within constrained theoretical bounds (Choromanski et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2020)
Therefore, when their assumptions are unsatisfied or when approximation errors get accumulated,
these methods may not always be advantageous over the vanilla architecture (Narang et al., 2021).
Consequently, performance deficiencies in a broad application spectrum are often observed in these
transformer variants, especially those with linear complexity. For example, the Performer (Choro-
manski et al., 2020), RFA (Peng et al., 2020) and Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2019) show less satis-
factory performance on the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018) when compared with the vanilla
architecture as suggested in our preliminary experiments (Tab. 2). Furthermore, many of these afore-
mentioned methods are not applicable to casual attentions, which are critical for auto-regressive
training. For example, techniques proposed in Linformer (Wang et al., 2020) and BigBird (Zaheer
et al., 2020) are specific to cross attentions.
Since the softmax operator appears to be the main hurdle while efficient yet accurate approximation
to softmax is difficult to achieve, one question naturally arises: “Can we replace the softmax opera-
tor with a linear function instead, while maintaining its key properties?”. By digging into the soft-
max attention, we find two key properties that affect its empirical performance: (i) elements in the
attention matrix are non-negative (Tsai et al., 2019; Katharopoulos et al., 2020); (ii) the non-linear
re-weighting scheme acts as a stabilizer for the attention weights (Titsias, 2016; Gao & Pavel, 2017;
Jang et al., 2016). These findings reveal some new insights of the current approaches. For example,
the linear transformer (Katharopoulos et al., 2020) achieves property (i) using an exponential linear
unit (Clevert et al., 2016) activation function. However, due to lack of the re-weighting scheme, it
underperforms other efficient transformer variants on the Long-Range Arena benchmark as shown
in Figure 1 as well as the language modeling task (Table 2) based on our controlled experiments.
In this paper, we propose a new variant of linear transformer called COS F ORMER that satisfies both
of the above properties. Specifically, we enforce the non-negative property by passing the features
to a ReLU (Agarap, 2018) activation function before computing the similarity scores. In this way,
we encourage the model to avoid aggregating negatively-correlated contextual information. Further,
we adopt a cos re-weighting scheme to stabilize the attention weights. This helps the model to
amplify local correlations, which usually contain more relevant information for natural language
tasks. Thanks to the Ptolemy’s theorem, our attention can be exactly decomposed into a linear form.
We perform extensive experiments on both autoregressive language models and bidirectional models
on five public benchmarks, including WikiText-103 (Merity et al., 2017), GLUE (Wang et al., 2018),
IMDB (Maas et al., 2011), AMAZON (Ni et al., 2019) and Long-Range Arena benchmark (Tay
et al., 2020b). Our model shows much better inference speed and smaller memory footprint, while
achieving on par performance with the vanilla transformer. It is noteworthy that our method ranks
1st on the Long-Range Arena benchmark, showing favorable performance than other competitors,
which well demonstrates its strong capacity in modeling long sequence inputs.

2   O UR M ETHOD

In this section, we provide technique details of our linear transformer called COS F ORMER . The key
insight of the COS F ORMER is to replace the non-decomposable non-linear softmax operation by a
linear operation with decomposable non-linear re-weighting mechanism. Our model is applicable


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




to both casual and cross attentions with a linear time and space complexity with regard to the input
sequence length, thus exhibiting strong capacity in modeling long-range dependencies.
2.1 T HE G ENERAL FORM OF T RANSFORMER
Given an input sequence x with length of N , we first represent it in the embedding space x ∈ RN ×d
with feature dimension of d. A transformer block T : RN ×d → RN ×d with input x is defined as:
                                       T (x) = F(A(x) + x),                                          (1)
where F is a feedforward network that contains a residual connection; A is the self-attention func-
tion that computes the attention matrix A, which has quadratic space and time complexity with
respect to N , thus becoming the computation bottleneck of T on long inputs.
There are three key components in A, namely, query (Q), key (K), value (V ) computed through
three learnable linear matrices WQ , WK , WV : Q = xWQ , K = xWK , V = xWV . We use Mi to
represent the i-th row of a matrix M , then the output O ∈ RN ×d of A(x) can be computed as:
                                                 T
                                                           X S(Qi , Kj )
                    O = A(x) = [O1 , . . . , ON ] , Oi =      P                Vj ,          (2)
                                                            j    j S(Qi , Kj )

where S(·) measures the similarity between queries. If S(Q, K) = exp(QK T ), the Eq. 2 becomes
the dot-product attention with softmax normalization. In this case, the space and time complexity
to compute one row of the output Oi is O(N ). Therefore, the total space and time complexity for
computing O grows quadratically with respect to the input length.
2.2 L INEARIZATION OF S ELF - ATTENTION
According to Eq. 2, we can select any similarity functions to compute the attention matrix. In order
to maintain a linear computation budget, one solution is to adopt a decomposable similarity function
such that:
                                   S(Qi , Kj ) = φ(Qi )φ(Kj )T ,                                 (3)
where φ is a kernel function that maps the queries and keys to their hidden representations. Then
one can rewrite Eq. 2 in the form of kernel functions as:
                                           PN
                                            j=1   (φ(Qi )φ(Kj )T )Vj
                                    Oi =    PN                    T)   .,                            (4)
                                              j=1 (φ(Qi )φ(Kj )


After that, attention operation in linear complexity is achieved via the matrix product property:
                                (φ(Q)φ(K)T )V = φ(Q)(φ(K)T V ).                                      (5)
                                                                                       T      N ×N
In this form (Eq. 5), instead of explicitly computing the attention matrix A = QK ∈ R         , we
calculate the φ(K)T V ∈ Rd×d first, and then multiplying φ(Q) ∈ RN ×d . By using this trick, we
only incurs a computation complexity of O(N d2 ). Note that in typical natural language tasks, the
feature dimension of one head d is always much smaller than the input sequence length N (d  N ),
so we can safely omit d and achieve computation complexity of O(N ), as illustrated in Figure 2.
Previous Solutions As aforementioned, the key to the linear attentions is to find a decomposable
similarity function S(·) that generalizes well to different tasks. Most existing linear transformers are
trying to find an unbiased estimation of the softmax attention. For example, RFA (Peng et al., 2020)
approximates the softmax operation with random feature maps using theorem of random fourier
features (Rahimi & Recht, 2008) and the Performer (Choromanski et al., 2020) utilizes positive
random features to approximate it. However, we empirically find that these methods are sensitive
to the selection of sampling rate and becomes unstable if the sampling rate gets too high. Also, to
accommodate recency bias, gating mechanisms are employed to better exploit more recent context.
Another group of works attempt to directly replace the softmax with a linear operation. For example,
the linear transformer (Katharopoulos et al., 2020) model replaces the softmax similarity function
with a pure dot product S = QK T , and use a non-linear activation function φ(·) = elu(·) + 1 to
model the pairwise relation between features. However, our controlled experiments show that their
solution does not necessarily generalize well on many downstream tasks (Tab. 2) or the Long-Range
Arena benchmark (Tab. 4). In this paper, we propose a new replacement of softmax that not only
achieves comparable or better performance than the softmax attention in a wide range of tasks, but
also enjoys linear space and time complexity.

                                                    3
