                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




                                         R EVISITING OVER - SMOOTHING IN BERT FROM THE
                                         P ERSPECTIVE OF G RAPH
                                          Han Shi1∗, Jiahui Gao2∗, Hang Xu3 , Xiaodan Liang4 ,
                                          Zhenguo Li3 , Lingpeng Kong2 , Stephen M.S. Lee2 , James T. Kwok1
                                          1
                                            Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 The University of Hong Kong,
                                          3
                                            Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 4 Sun Yat-sen University
                                          {hshiac,jamesk}@cse.ust.hk,{sumiler,smslee}@hku.hk,lpk@cs.hku.hk,
                                          {xu.hang,li.zhenguo}@huawei.com,xdliang328@gmail.com




arXiv:2202.08625v1 [cs.LG] 17 Feb 2022
                                                                                         A BSTRACT
                                                      Recently over-smoothing phenomenon of Transformer-based models is observed
                                                      in both vision and language fields. However, no existing work has delved deeper
                                                      to further investigate the main cause of this phenomenon. In this work, we make
                                                      the attempt to analyze the over-smoothing problem from the perspective of graph,
                                                      where such problem was first discovered and explored. Intuitively, the self-attention
                                                      matrix can be seen as a normalized adjacent matrix of a corresponding graph. Based
                                                      on the above connection, we provide some theoretical analysis and find that layer
                                                      normalization plays a key role in the over-smoothing issue of Transformer-based
                                                      models. Specifically, if the standard deviation of layer normalization is sufficiently
                                                      large, the output of Transformer stacks will converge to a specific low-rank subspace
                                                      and result in over-smoothing. To alleviate the over-smoothing problem, we consider
                                                      hierarchical fusion strategies, which combine the representations from different
                                                      layers adaptively to make the output more diverse. Extensive experiment results on
                                                      various data sets illustrate the effect of our fusion method.


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION
                                         Over the past few years, Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been widely used in various natural
                                         language processing (NLP) tasks, including text classification (Wang et al., 2018a), text translation
                                         (Ott et al., 2018), question answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; 2018) and text generation (Brown
                                         et al., 2020). The recent application of Transformer in computer vision (CV) field also demonstrate
                                         the potential capacity of Transformer architecture. For instance, Transformer variants have been
                                         successfully used for image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), object detection (Carion et al.,
                                         2020) and semantic segmentation (Strudel et al., 2021). Three fundamental descendants from
                                         Transformer include BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and ALBERT (Lan
                                         et al., 2020), which achieve state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of NLP tasks.
                                         Recently, Dong et al. (2021) observes the “token uniformity” problem, which reduces the capacity
                                         of Transformer-based architectures by making all token representations identical. They claim that
                                         pure self-attention (SAN) modules cause token uniformity, but they do not discuss whether the token
                                         uniformity problem still exists in Transformer blocks. On the other hand, Gong et al. (2021) observe
                                         the “over-smoothing” problem for ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), in that different input patches are
                                         mapped to a similar latent representation. To prevent loss of information, they introduce additional
                                         loss functions to encourage diversity and successfully improve model performance by suppressing
                                         over-smoothing. Moreover, “overthinking” phenomenon, indicating that shallow representations
                                         are better than deep representations, also be observed in (Zhou et al., 2020; Kaya et al., 2019). As
                                         discussed in Section 3, this phenomenon has some inherent connection with over-smoothing. In this
                                         paper, we use “over-smoothing” to unify the above issues, and refer this as the phenomenon that the
                                         model performance is deteriorated because different inputs are mapped to a similar representation.
                                         As the over-smoothing problem is first studied in the graph neural network (GNN) literature (Li et al.,
                                         2018; Xu et al., 2018; Zhao & Akoglu, 2020), in this paper, we attempt to explore the cause of such
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal contribution.


                                                                                                1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




problem by building a relationship between Transformer blocks and graphs. Specifically, we consider
the self-attention matrix as the normalized adjacency matrix of a weighted graph, whose nodes are
the tokens in a sentence. Furthermore, we consider the inherent connection between BERT and graph
convolutional networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017). Inspired by the over-smoothing problem in GNN,
we study over-smoothing in BERT from a theoretical view via matrix projection. As opposed to Dong
et al. (2021), where the authors claim that layer normalization is irrelevant to over-smoothing, we
find that layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) plays an important role in over-smoothing. Specifically,
we theoretically prove that, if the standard deviation in layer normalization is sufficiently large, the
outputs of the Transformer stacks will converge to a low-rank subspace, resulting in over-smoothing.
Empirically, we verify that the conditions hold for a certain number of samples for a pre-trained and
fine-tuned BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019), which is consistent with our above observations.
To alleviate the over-smoothing problem, we propose a hierarchical fusion strategy that adaptively
fuses representations from different layers. Three fusion approaches are used: (i) Concat Fusion,
(ii) Max Fusion, and (iii) Gate Fusion. The proposed method reduces the similarity between tokens
and outperforms BERT baseline on the GLUE (Wang et al., 2018a), SWAG (Zellers et al., 2018) and
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; 2018) data sets.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) We develop the relationship between
self-attention and graph for a better understanding of over-smoothing in BERT. (ii) We provide
theoretical analysis on over-smoothing in the BERT model, and empirically verify the theoretical
results. (iii) We propose hierarchical fusion strategies that adaptively combine different layers to
alleviate over-smoothing. Extensive experimental results verify our methods’ effectiveness.

2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   T RANSFORMER B LOCK AND S ELF -ATTENTION

Transformer block is a basic component in Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017). Each Trans-
former block consists of a self-attention layer and a feed-forward layer. Let X ∈ Rn×d be the input
to a Transformer block, where n is the number of input tokens and d is the embedding size. The
self-attention layer output can be written as:
                           h
                           X                                                  h
                                                                              X
       Attn(X) = X +             σ(XWkQ (XWkK )> )XWkV WkO> = X +                   Âk XWkV O ,     (1)
                           k=1                                                k=1

where h is the number of heads, σ is the softmax function, and WkQ , WkK , WkV , WkO ∈ Rd×dh
(where dh = d/h is the dimension of a single-head output) are weight matrices for the query, key,
value, and output, respectively of the kth head. In particular, the self-attention matrix
                              Â = σ(XW Q (XW K )> ) = σ(QK > )                                      (2)
in (1) plays a key role in the self-attention layer (Park et al., 2019; Gong et al., 2019; Kovaleva et
                                                                                                    √al.,
2019). As in (Yun et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2021), we drop the scale product 1/ dh
to simplify analysis.
The feed-forward layer usually has two fully-connected (FC) layers with residual connection:
                   F F (X) = Attn(X) + ReLU (Attn(X)W1 + b1 )W2 + b2 ,
where W1 ∈ R    d×dff
                      , W2 ∈ Rdff ×d (dff is the size of the intermediate layer) are the weight matrices,
and b1 , b2 are the biases. Two layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) operations are performed after
the self-attention layer and fully-connected layer, respectively.

2.2   OVER - SMOOTHING

In graph neural networks, over-smoothing refers to the problem that the performance deteriorates
as representations of all the nodes become similar (Li et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2020). Its main cause is the stacked aggregation layer using the same adjacency matrix. Recently,
several approaches have been proposed to alleviate the over-smoothing problem. Xu et al. (2018)
propose a jumping knowledge network for better structure-aware representation, which flexibly


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




    (a) Token-wise cosine similarity.       (b) Token similarity and error.        (c) Hierarchical fusion.

                                  Figure 1: Over-smoothing in BERT models.


leverages different neighborhood ranges. ResGCN (Li et al., 2019) adapts the residual connection and
dilated convolution in the graph convolutional network (GCN), and successfully scales the GCN to
56 layers. Zhao & Akoglu (2020) propose PairNorm, a novel normalization layer, that prevents node
embeddings from becoming too similar. DropEdge (Rong et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020) randomly
removes edges from the input graph at each training epoch, and reduces the effect of over-smoothing.
Unlike graph neural networks, over-smoothing in Transformer-based architectures has not been
discussed in detail. Dong et al. (2021) introduce the “token-uniformity” problem for self-attention,
and show that skip connections and multi-layer perceptron can mitigate this problem. However, Gong
et al. (2021) still observe over-smoothing on the Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).

3        D OES OVER - SMOOTHING E XIST IN BERT?
In this section, we first explore the existence of over-smoothing in BERT, by measuring the similarity
between tokens in each Transformer layer. Specifically, we use the token-wise cosine similarity
(Gong et al., 2021) as our similarity measure:
                                                    1     X   h> i hj
                                     CosSim =                             ,
                                                 n(n − 1)   khi k2 khj k2
                                                              i6=j

where n is the number of tokens, hi and hj are two representations of different tokens, and k · k2 is
the Euclidean norm. Following Dong et al. (2021), we use WikiBio (Lebret et al., 2016) as input to
the following Transformer-based models fine-tuned on the SQuAD data set (Rajpurkar et al., 2018):
(i) BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), (ii) RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and (iii) ALBERT (Lan et al., 2020).1
For comparison, all three models are stacked with 12 blocks. We calculate each CosSim for each data
sample and show the average and standard derivation of CosSim values over all WikiBio data.
In the figures, layer 0 represents original input token representation, and layer 1-12 represents the
corresponding transformer layers. As shown in Figure 1(a), the original token representations are
different from each other, while token similarities are high in the last layer. For instance, the average
token-wise cosine similarity of the last layer of ALBERT and RoBERTa are both larger than 90%.
To illustrate the relationship between “over-thinking” and “over-smoothing”, we compare the token-
wise cosine similarity at each layer with the corresponding error rate. As for the corresponding error
rate of layer i, we use the representations from layer i as the final output and fine-tune the classifier.
Following Zhou et al. (2020), we experiment with ALBERT (Lan et al., 2020) fine-tuned on the
MRPC data set (Dolan & Brockett, 2005) and use their error rate results for convenience. As shown
in Figure 1(b), layer 10 has the lowest cosine similarity and error rate. At layers 11 and 12, the tokens
have larger cosine similarities, making them harder to distinguish and resulting in the performance
drop. Thus, “over-thinking” can be explained by “over-smoothing”.
A direct consequence of over-smoothing is that the performance cannot be improved when the model
gets deeper, since the individual tokens are no longer distinguishable. To illustrate this, we increase
the number of layers in BERT to 24 while keeping the other settings. As shown in Figure 1(c), the
     1
         Our implementation is based on the HuggingFace’s Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020).


                                                          3
