                                         A M UTUAL I NFORMATION M AXIMIZATION P ERSPEC -
                                         TIVE OF L ANGUAGE R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

                                          Lingpeng Kong♠ , Cyprien de Masson d’Autume♠ , Wang Ling♠ , Lei Yu♠ , Zihang Dai♥♣
                                          Dani Yogatama♠
                                          DeepMind♠ , Carnegie Mellon University♥ , Google Brain♣
                                          London, United Kingdom
                                          {lingpenk,cyprien,lingwang,leiyu,zihangd,dyogatama}@google.com




arXiv:1910.08350v2 [cs.CL] 26 Nov 2019
                                                                                     A BSTRACT
                                                  We show state-of-the-art word representation learning methods maximize an ob-
                                                  jective function that is a lower bound on the mutual information between different
                                                  parts of a word sequence (i.e., a sentence). Our formulation provides an alternative
                                                  perspective that unifies classical word embedding models (e.g., Skip-gram) and
                                                  modern contextual embeddings (e.g., BERT, XLNet). In addition to enhancing our
                                                  theoretical understanding of these methods, our derivation leads to a principled
                                                  framework that can be used to construct new self-supervised tasks. We provide an
                                                  example by drawing inspirations from related methods based on mutual informa-
                                                  tion maximization that have been successful in computer vision, and introduce a
                                                  simple self-supervised objective that maximizes the mutual information between a
                                                  global sentence representation and n-grams in the sentence. Our analysis offers a
                                                  holistic view of representation learning methods to transfer knowledge and trans-
                                                  late progress across multiple domains (e.g., natural language processing, computer
                                                  vision, audio processing).


                                         1   I NTRODUCTION
                                         Advances in representation learning have driven progress in natural language processing. Performance
                                         on many downstream tasks have improved considerably, achieving parity with human baselines in
                                         benchmark leaderboards such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; 2018) and GLUE (Wang et al.,
                                         2019). The main ingredient is the “pretrain and fine-tune” approach, where a large text encoder
                                         is trained on an unlabeled corpus with self-supervised training objectives and used to initialize a
                                         task-specific model. Such an approach has also been shown to reduce the number of training examples
                                         that is needed to achieve good performance on the task of interest (Yogatama et al., 2019).
                                         In contrast to first-generation models that learn word type embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pen-
                                         nington et al., 2014), recent methods have focused on contextual token representations—i.e., learning
                                         an encoder to represent words in context. Many of these encoders are trained with a language
                                         modeling objective, where the representation of a context is trained to be predictive of a target token
                                         by maximizing the log likelihood of predicting this token (Dai & Le, 2015; Howard & Ruder, 2018;
                                         Radford et al., 2018; 2019). In a vanilla language modeling objective, the target token is always
                                         the next token that follows the context. Peters et al. (2018) propose an improvement by adding a
                                         reverse objective that also predicts the word token that precedes the context. Following this trend,
                                         current state-of-the-art encoders such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019)
                                         are also trained with variants of the language modeling objective: masked language modeling and
                                         permutation language modeling.
                                         In this paper, we provide an alternative view and show that these methods also maximize a lower
                                         bound on the mutual information between different parts of a word sequence. Such a framework
                                         is inspired by the InfoMax principle (Linsker, 1988) and has been the main driver of progress in
                                         self-supervised representation learning in other domains such as computer vision, audio processing,
                                         and reinforcement learning (Belghazi et al., 2018; van den Oord et al., 2019; Hjelm et al., 2019;


                                                                                           1
Bachman et al., 2019; O’Connor & Veeling, 2019). Many of these methods are trained to maximize
a particular lower bound called InfoNCE (van den Oord et al., 2019)—also known as contrastive
learning (Arora et al., 2019). The main idea behind contrastive learning is to divide an input data
into multiple (possibly overlapping) views and maximize the mutual information between encoded
representations of these views, using views derived from other inputs as negative samples. In §2, we
provide an overview of representation learning with mutual information maximization. We then show
how the skip-gram objective (§3.1; Mikolov et al. 2013), masked language modeling (§3.2; Devlin
et al. 2018), and permutation language modeling (§3.3; Yang et al. 2019), fit in this framework.
In addition to providing a principled theoretical understanding that bridges progress in multiple areas,
our proposed framework also gives rise to a general class of word representation learning models
which serves as a basis for designing and combining self-supervised training objectives to create better
language representations. As an example, we show how to use this framework to construct a simple
self-supervised objective that maximizes the mutual information between a sentence and n-grams in
the sentence (§4). We combine it with a variant of the masked language modeling objective and show
that the resulting representation performs better, particularly on tasks such as question answering and
linguistics acceptability (§5).

2       M UTUAL I NFORMATION M AXIMIZATION
Mutual information measures dependencies between random variables. Given two random variables
A and B, it can be understood as how much knowing A reduces the uncertainty in B or vice versa.
Formally, the mutual information between A and B is:
                        I(A, B) = H(A) − H(A | B) = H(B) − H(B | A).
Consider A and B to be different views of an input data (e.g., a word and its context, two different
partitions of a sentence). Consider a function f that takes A = a and B = b as its input. The goal of
training is to learn parameters of the function f that maximizes I(A, B).
Maximizing mutual information directly is generally intractable when the function f consists of
modern encoders such as neural networks (Paninski, 2003), so we need to resort to a lower bound
on I(A, B). One particular lower bound that has been shown to work well in practice is InfoNCE
(Logeswaran & Lee, 2018; van den Oord et al., 2019),1 which is based on Noise Contrastive
Estimation (NCE; Gutmann & Hyvarinen, 2012).2 InfoNCE is defined as:
                                                                     
                                                      X
           I(A, B) ≥ Ep(A,B) fθ (a, b) − Eq(B̃) log    exp fθ (a, b̃) + log | B̃ |,      (1)
                                                           b̃∈B̃

where a and b are different views of an input sequence, fθ ∈ R is a function parameterized by θ
(e.g., a dot product between encoded representations of a word and its context, a dot product between
encoded representations of two partitions of a sentence), and B̃ is a set of samples drawn from a
proposal distribution q(B̃). The set B̃ contains the positive sample b and |B̃| − 1 negative samples.
Learning representations based on this objective is also known as contrastive learning. Arora et al.
(2019) show representations learned by such a method have provable performance guarantees and
reduce sample complexity on downstream tasks.
We note that InfoNCE is related to cross-entropy. When B̃ always includes all possible values of
the random variable B (i.e., B̃ = B) and they are uniformly distributed, maximizing InfoNCE is
analogous to maximizing the standard cross-entropy loss:
                                                                    
                                                    X
                           Ep(A,B) fθ (a, b) − log    exp fθ (a, b̃) .                     (2)
                                                        b̃∈B
    1
     Alternative bounds include Donsker-Vardhan representation (Donsker & Varadhan, 1983) and Jensen-
Shannon estimator (Nowozin et al., 2016), but we focus on InfoNCE here.
   2
     See van den Oord et al. (2019); Poole et al. (2019) for detailed derivations of InfoNCE as a bound on
mutual information.


                                                    2
Eq. 2 above shows that InfoNCE is related to maximizing pθ (b | a), and it approximates the
summation over elements in B (i.e., the partition function) by negative sampling. As a function of the
negative samples, the InfoNCE bound is tighter when B̃ contains more samples (as can be seen in
Eq. 1 above by inspecting the log |B̃| term). Approximating a softmax over a large vocabulary with
negative samples is a popular technique that has been widely used in natural language processing in
the past. We discuss it here to make the connection under this framework clear.


3     M ODELS

We describe how Skip-gram, BERT, and XLNet fit into the mutual information maximization
framework as instances of InfoNCE. In the following, we assume that fθ (a, b) = gψ (b)> gω (a),
where θ = {ω, ψ}. Denote the vocabulary set by V and the size of the vocabulary by V . For word
representation learning, we seek to learn an encoder parameterized by ω to represent each word in a
sequence x = {x1 , x1 , . . . , xT } in d dimensions. For each of the models we consider in this paper, a
and b are formed by taking different parts of x (e.g., a := x0 and b := xT ).


3.1   S KIP - GRAM

We first start with a simple word representation learning model Skip-gram (Mikolov et al., 2013).
Skip-gram is a method for learning word representations that relies on the assumption that a good
representation of a word should
                                  be predictive
                                                of its context. The objective function that is maximized
in Skip-gram is: Ep(xi ,xij ) p(xij | xi ) , where xi is a word token and xij is a context word of xi .

Let b be the context word to be predicted xij and a be the input word xi . Recall that fθ (a, b) is
gψ (b)> gω (a). The skip-gram objective function can be written as an instance of InfoNCE (Eq. 1)
where gψ (b) and gω (a) are embedding lookup functions that map each word type to Rd . (i.e.,
gψ (b), gω (a) : V → Rd ).
p(xij | xi ) can either be computed using a standard softmax over the entire vocabulary or with
negative sampling (when the vocabulary is very large). These two approaches correspond to different
choices of B̃. In the softmax approach, B̃ is the full vocabulary set V and each word in V is
uniformly distributed. In negative sampling, B̃ is a set of negative samples drawn from e.g., a unigram
distribution.
While Skip-gram has been widely accepted as an instance contrastive learning (Mikolov et al., 2013;
Mnih & Kavukcuoglu, 2013), we include it here to illustrate its connection with modern approaches
such as BERT and XLNet described subsequently. We can see that the two views of an input sentence
that are considered in Skip-gram are two words that appear in the same sentence, and they are encoded
using simple lookup functions.


3.2   BERT

Devlin et al. (2018) introduce two self-supervised tasks for learning contextual word representations:
masked language modeling and next sentence prediction. Previous work suggests that the next
sentence prediction objective is not necessary to train a high quality BERT encoder and the masked
language modeling appears to be the key to learn good representations (Liu et al., 2019; Joshi et al.,
2019; Lample & Conneau, 2019), so we focus on masked language modeling here. However, we also
show how next sentence prediction fits into our framework in Appendix A.
In masked language modeling, given a sequence of word tokens of length T , x = {x1 , . . . , xT },
BERT replaces 15% of the tokens in the sequence with (i) a mask symbol 80% of the time, (ii) a
random word 10% of the time, or (iii) its original word. For each replaced token, it introduces a term
in the masked language modeling training objective to predict the original word given the perturbed
sequence x̂i = {x1 , . . . , x̂i , . . . , xT } (i.e., the sequence x masked at xi ). This training objective can
be written as: Ep(xi ,x̂i ) [p(xi | x̂i )].


                                                       3
