                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019




                                         VARIATIONAL S MOOTHING IN R ECURRENT N EURAL
                                         N ETWORK L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                                          Lingpeng Kong, Gabor Melis, Wang Ling, Lei Yu, Dani Yogatama
                                          DeepMind
                                          {lingpenk, melisgl, lingwang, leiyu, dyogatama}@google.com



                                                                                     A BSTRACT




arXiv:1901.09296v1 [cs.CL] 27 Jan 2019
                                                  We present a new theoretical perspective of data noising in recurrent neural network
                                                  language models (Xie et al., 2017). We show that each variant of data noising is an
                                                  instance of Bayesian recurrent neural networks with a particular variational distribu-
                                                  tion (i.e., a mixture of Gaussians whose weights depend on statistics derived from
                                                  the corpus such as the unigram distribution). We use this insight to propose a more
                                                  principled method to apply at prediction time and propose natural extensions to
                                                  data noising under the variational framework. In particular, we propose variational
                                                  smoothing with tied input and output embedding matrices and an element-wise
                                                  variational smoothing method. We empirically verify our analysis on two bench-
                                                  mark language modeling datasets and demonstrate performance improvements over
                                                  existing data noising methods.



                                         1   I NTRODUCTION

                                         Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are state of the art models in various language processing tasks.
                                         However, their performance heavily depends on proper regularization at training time (Melis et al.,
                                         2018b; Merity et al., 2018). The two predominant approaches to regularize RNNs are dropout
                                         (randomly zeroing out neurons; Srivastava et al., 2014) and `2 regularization (applying `2 penalty
                                         to model parameters; Hoerl & Kennard, 1970). Recently, Xie et al. (2017) proposed data noising
                                         to regularize language models. Their method is formulated as a data augmentation method that
                                         randomly replaces words with other words drawn from a proposal distribution. For example, we can
                                         use the unigram distribution which models the number of word occurrences in the training corpus, or
                                         a more sophisticated proposal distribution that takes into account the number of bigram types in the
                                         corpus. Data noising has been shown to improve perplexity on small and large corpora, and that this
                                         improvement is complementary to other regularization techniques and translates to improvements on
                                         downstream models such as machine translation.
                                         Xie et al. (2017) derived connections between data noising and smoothing in classical n-gram
                                         language models, which we review in §2. In smoothing (Chen & Goodman, 1996), since empirical
                                         counts for unseen sequences are zero, we smooth our estimates by a weighted average of higher order
                                         and lower order n-gram models. There are various ways to choose the weights and the lower order
                                         models leading to different smoothing techniques, with Kneser-Ney smoothing widely considered to
                                         be the most effective. Xie et al. (2017) showed that the pseudocounts of a noised data correspond to a
                                         mixture of different n-gram models.
                                         In this paper, we provide a new theoretical foundation for data noising and show that it can be
                                         understood as a form of Bayesian recurrent neural network with a particular variational distribution
                                         (§4.1 and §4.2). Our derivation relates data noising to dropout and variational dropout (Gal &
                                         Ghahramani, 2016b), and naturally leads to a data dependent `2 regularization coefficient. We use
                                         this insight to arrive at a more principled way to do prediction with data noising—i.e., by taking the
                                         mean of the variational distribution, as opposed to the mode—and propose several extensions under
                                         the variational framework in §4.3. Specifically, we show how to use variational smoothing with tied
                                         input and output embeddings and propose element-wise smooothing. In §5, we validate our analysis
                                         in language modeling experiments on the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1994) and Wikitext-2 (Merity
                                         et al., 2017) datasets.


                                                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019




2    R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORK L ANGUAGE M ODELS
We consider a language modeling problem where the goal is to predict the next word xt given
previously seen context words x<t = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xt−1 }. Let W be parameters of a recurrent neural
network, and p(xt | x<t ; W) = RNN(x<t ; W). Following previous work in language modeling
(Melis et al., 2018b; Merity et al., 2018), we use LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) as our
RNN function, although other variants such as GRU (Cho et al., 2014) can be used as well.
Given a training corpus D = {x0 , . . . , xT }, the likelihood we would like to maximize is:
                                                  T
                                                  Y
                                   L(W; D) =            p(xt | x<t ; W).
                                                  t=1


Directly optimizing the (log) likelihood above often leads to overfitting. We typically augment the
objective function with a regularizer (e.g., `2 regularizer where R(W) = λkWk22 ) or use dropout by
randomly zeroing out neurons (Srivastava et al., 2014).

Data noising as smoothing. Xie et al. (2017) proposed a method to regularize recurrent neural
network language models by noising the data. For each input word i in x<t (sometimes also the
corresponding output word), we replace it with another word sampled from a proposal distribution T
with probability γi . They introduced various methods on how to choose γi and T.
For example, if γi = γ for all i ∈ V and T is the unigram distribution of words in the corpus,
ET [p(xt | noiseγ,T (x<t ); W)] corresponds to a mixture of n-gram models with fixed weights (i.e.,
linear interpolation smoothing).
Another option is to set γi = γ distinct(i,•)
                                  count(i) , where distinct(i, •) denotes the number of distinct continu-
ations preceded by word i (i.e., the number of bigram types that has i as the first word), and count(i)
denotes the number of times i appears in the corpus. For this choice of γi , when T is the unigram
distribution, the expectation corresponds to absolute discounting; whereas if Ti = P distinct(•,i)
                                                                                          v∈V distinct(•,v)
and we replace both the input and output words, it corresponds to bigram Kneser-Ney smoothing. We
summarize their proposed methods in Table 1.
At prediction (test) time, Xie et al. (2017) do not apply any noising and directly predict p(xt |
x<t ; W). They showed that a combination of smoothing and dropout achieves the best result on their
language modeling and machine translation experiments.

                           Name             Noised                     γi                   Tx
                      Blank noising               x0                    γ            T“_” = 1
                   Linear interpolation           x0                    γ            unigram
                  Absolute discounting            x0       γ distinct(i,•)
                                                               count(i)              unigram
                       Kneser-Ney            x0 , x1       γ distinct(i,•)
                                                               count(i)
                                                                             P distinct(•,i)
                                                                              v∈V distinct(•,v)


Table 1: Variants of data noising techniques proposed in Xie et al. (2017) for context word x0 and
target word x1 . Blank noising replaces an input word with a blank word, denoted by “_”.


3    BAYESIAN R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORKS
In Bayesian RNNs, we define a prior over our parameters W and consider the following maximization
problem:
                                          T
                                        Z Y
                              L(D) =             p(xt | x<t ; W)p(W)dW .
                                           t=1

A common prior is the standard normal distribution p(W) = N(0, I).


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019




For recurrent neural networks, the posterior over W given the data D is intractable. We approximate
the posterior with a variational distribution q(W), and minimize the KL divergence between the
variational distribution and the true posterior by:
                                                    Z
  KL(q(W)kp(W | D)) = KL(q(W)kp(W)) − log p(D | W)q(W)dW + constant
                                                                T Z
                                                                X
                                = KL(q(W)kp(W)) −                       log p(xt | x<t ; W)q(W)dW + constant
                                                                t=1
The integral is often approximated with Monte Carlo integration with one sample W̃ ∼ q(W):1
                  Z
                     log p(xt | x<t ; W)q(W)dW ≈ log p(xt | x<t ; W̃)q(W̃)dW̃ .             (1)

At test time, for a new sequence y0 , . . . , yT , we can either set W to be the mean of q(W) or sample
                                               PS
and average the results: p(yt | y<t ) = S1 s=1 p(yt | y<t ; W̃s ), where S is the number of samples
and W̃s ∼ q(W).

4       VARIATIONAL S MOOTHING
We now provide theoretical justifications for data smoothing under the variational framework. In
a recurrent neural network language model, there are three types of parameters: an input (word)
embedding matrix E, an LSTM parameter matrix R, and an output embedding matrix O that produces
logits for the final softmax function. We have W = {E, R, O}.

4.1       L INEAR INTERPOLATION SMOOTHING .

We first focus on the simplest data noising method—linear interpolation smoothing—and show how
to extend it to other data noising methods subsequently.

Word embedding matrix E. Denote the word vector corresponding to word i ∈ V in the input
embedding matrix E by ei . We obtain a similar effect to linear interpolation smoothing by using the
following mixture of Gaussians variational distribution for ei :
                                                       X
                 ei ∼ q(ei ) = (1 − γ)N(ei , σI) + γ       Uv N(ev , σI)
                                                                      v∈V
                                                                             X
                                    = (1 − γ + γUi )N(ei , σI) + γ                   Uv N(ev , σI),       (2)
                                                                            v6=i∈V
where Uv is the unigram probability of word v and σ is small. In other words, with probability γUv ,
we replace the embedding ei with another embedding sampled from a normal distribution centered at
ev .
Note that noising the input word is equivalent to choosing a different word embedding vector to be
used in a standard recurrent neural network. Under the variational framework, we sample a different
word embedding matrix for every sequence t at training time, since the integral is approximated with
Monte Carlo by sampling from q(ei ) (Eq. 1).
The above formulation is related to word embedding dropout (Dai & Le, 2015; Iyyer et al., 2015;
Kumar et al., 2016), although in word embedding dropout q(ei ) = (1 − γ)N(ei , σI) + γN(0, σI).

KL term. For p(ei ) = N(0, I), we use Proposition 1 in Gal & Ghahramani (2016a) and approxi-
mate the KL divergence between a mixture of Gaussians q(ei ) and p(ei ) as:
                                X θi
                                     v
                                        e> ev + tr(σI) − V (1 + log 2π) − log |σI|
                                                                                   
          KL(q(ei )kp(ei )) ≈ λ
                                    2 v
                                         v∈V
                                          X θi
                                                v
                                    =λ              kev k22 + constant,
                                               2
                                         v∈V
    1
        In the followings, we use x̃ to denote a sample from a distribution q(x).


                                                            3
