                                        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016




                                        S EGMENTAL R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORKS
                                         Lingpeng Kong, Chris Dyer
                                         School of Computer Science
                                         Carnegie Mellon University
                                         Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
                                         {lingpenk, cdyer}@cs.cmu.edu

                                         Noah A. Smith
                                         Computer Science & Engineering
                                         University of Washington




arXiv:1511.06018v2 [cs.CL] 1 Mar 2016
                                         Seattle, WA 98195, USA
                                         nasmith@cs.washington.edu



                                                                                   A BSTRACT

                                                 We introduce segmental recurrent neural networks (SRNNs) which define,
                                                 given an input sequence, a joint probability distribution over segmentations of
                                                 the input and labelings of the segments. Representations of the input segments
                                                 (i.e., contiguous subsequences of the input) are computed by encoding their con-
                                                 stituent tokens using bidirectional recurrent neural nets, and these “segment em-
                                                 beddings” are used to define compatibility scores with output labels. These lo-
                                                 cal compatibility scores are integrated using a global semi-Markov conditional
                                                 random field. Both fully supervised training—in which segment boundaries and
                                                 labels are observed—as well as partially supervised training—in which segment
                                                 boundaries are latent—are straightforward. Experiments on handwriting recog-
                                                 nition and joint Chinese word segmentation/POS tagging show that, compared to
                                                 models that do not explicitly represent segments such as BIO tagging schemes and
                                                 connectionist temporal classification (CTC), SRNNs obtain substantially higher
                                                 accuracies.



                                        1   I NTRODUCTION

                                        For sequential data like speech, handwriting, and DNA, segmentation and segment-labeling are
                                        abstractions that capture many common data analysis challenges. We consider the joint task of
                                        breaking an input sequence into contiguous, arbitrary-length segments while labeling each segment.
                                        Our new approach to this problem is the segmental recursive neural network (SRNN). SRNNs com-
                                        bine two powerful machine learning tools: representation learning and structured prediction. First,
                                        bidirectional recurrent neural networks (RNNs) embed every feasible segment of the input in a con-
                                        tinuous space, and these embeddings are then used to calculate the compatibility of each candidate
                                        segment with a label. Unlike past RNN-based approaches (e.g., connectionist temporal classification
                                        or CTC; Graves et al., 2006) each candidate segment is represented explicitly, allowing application
                                        in settings where an alignment between segments and labels is desired as part of the output (e.g.,
                                        protein secondary structure prediction or information extraction from text).
                                        At the same time, SRNNs are a variant of semi-Markov conditional random fields (Sarawagi & Co-
                                        hen, 2004), in that they define a conditional probability distribution over the output space (segmen-
                                        tation and labeling) given the input sequence (§2). This allows explicit modeling of statistical de-
                                        pendencies, such as those between adjacent labels, and also of segment lengths (unlike widely used
                                        symbolic approaches based on “BIO” tagging; Ramshaw & Marcus, 1995). Because the probability
                                        score decomposes into chain-structured clique potentials, polynomial-time dynamic programming
                                        algorithms exist for prediction and parameter estimation (§3).


                                                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016




Parameters can be learned with either a fully supervised objective—where both segment boundaries
and segment labels are provided at training time—and partially supervised training objectives—
where segment boundaries are latent (§4).
We compare SRNNs to strong models that do not explicitly represent segments on handwriting
recognition and joint word segmentation and part-of-speech tagging for Chinese text, showing sig-
nificant accuracy improvements in both, demonstrating the value of models that explicitly model
segmentation even when segmentation is not necessary for downstream tasks (§5).

2    M ODEL
Given a sequence of input observations x = hx1 , x2 , . . . , x|x| i with length |x|, a segmental recur-
rent neural network (SRNN) defines a joint distribution p(y, z | x) over a sequence of labeled
segments each of which is characterized by a duration (zi ∈ Z+ ) and label (yi ∈ Y ). The segment
                                P|z|
durations constrained such that i=1 zi = |x|. The length of the output sequence |y| = |z| is
a randomP variable, and |y| ≤ |x| with probability 1. We write the starting time of segment i as
si = 1 + j<i zj .
To motivate our model form, we state several desiderata. First, we are interested in the following
prediction problem,
                                           X
          y ∗ = arg max p(y | x) = arg max     p(y, z | x) ≈ arg max max p(y, z | x).          (1)
                        y                       y                               y     z
                                                      z

Note the use of joint maximization over y and z as a computationally tractable substitute for
marginalizing out z; this is commonly done in natural language processing.
Second, for problems where the explicit durations observations are unavailable at training time and
are inferred as a latent variable, we must be able to use a marginal likelihood training criterion,
                                                           X
                              L = − log p(y | x) = − log      p(y, z | x).                          (2)
                                                                  z

In Eqs. 1 and 2, the conditional probability of the labeled segment sequence is (assuming kth order
dependencies on y):
                                                          |y|
                                               1 Y
                                p(y, z | x) =          exp f (yi−k:i , zi , x)                                 (3)
                                              Z(x) i=1

where Z(x) is an appropriate normalization function. To ensure the expressiveness of f and the
computational efficiency of the maximization and marginalization problems in Eqs. 1 and 2, we use
the following definition of f ,
    f (yi−k:i , zi , xsi :si +zi −1 ) = w> φ(V[gy (yi−k ); . . . ; gy (yi ); gz (zi );
                                                  −−→                       ←−−                                (4)
                                                  RNN(csi :si +zi −1 ); RNN(csi :si +zi −1 )] + a) + b
       −−→
where RNN(csi :si +zi −1 ) is a recurrent neural network that computes the forward segment em-
                                                                                   ←−−
bedding by “encoding” the zi -length subsequence of x starting at index si ,1 and RNN computes
the reverse segment embedding (i.e., traversing the sequence in reverse order), and gy and gz are
functions which map the label candidate y and segmentation duration z into a vector representation.
The notation [a; b; c] denotes vector concatenation. Finally, the concatenated segment duration,
label candidates and segment embedding are passed through a affine transformation layer param-
eterized by V and a and a nonlinear activation function φ (e.g., tanh), and a dot product with a
vector w and addition by scalar b computes the log potential for the clique. Our proposed model
is equivalent to a semi-Markov conditional random field with local features computed using neural
networks. Figure 1 shows the model graphically.
    1
      Rather than directly reading the xi ’s, each token is represented as the concatenation, ci , of a forward and
backward over the sequence of raw inputs. This permits tokens to be sensitive to the contexts they occur in, and
this is standardly used with neural net sequence labeling models (Graves et al., 2006).


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2016




We chose bidirectional LSTMs (Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005) as the implementation of the RNNs
in Eq. 4. LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) are a popular variant of RNNs which have
been seen successful in many representation learning problems (Graves & Jaitly, 2014; Karpathy &
Fei-Fei, 2015). Bidirectional LSTMs enable effective computation for embedings in both directions
and are known to be good at preserving long distance dependencies, and hence are well-suited for
our task.


                                                  (

                        Segmentation/Labeling Model
                                                                       y1                y2       y3

                                                      z1                        z2                z3


                                                      h 1,3                     h 4,5             h 6,6

                                                                       !                 !        !
                                                                       h 1,3             h 4,5    h 6,6


                                                  (   c1      c2       c3       c4       c5       c6




                        Encoder BiRNN



                                                      x111    x21212   xx
                                                                        x3213   xx4214   xx
                                                                                          x5215   xx6216


Figure 1: Graphical model showing a six-frame input and three output segments with durations
z = h3, 2, 1i (this particular setting of z is shown only to simplify the layout of this figure; the model
assigns probabilities to all valid settings of z). Circles represent random variables. Shaded nodes are
observed in training; open nodes are latent random variables; diamonds are deterministic functions
of their parents; dashed lines indicate optional statistical dependencies that can be included at the
cost of increased inference complexity. The graphical notation we use here draws on conventions
used to illustrate neural networks and graphical models.



3     I NFERENCE WITH DYNAMIC P ROGRAMMING

We are interested in three inference problems: (i) finding the most probable segmentation/labeling
for a model given a sequence x; (ii) evaluating the partition function Z(x); and (iii) computing
the posterior marginal Z(x, y), which sums over all segmentations compatible with a reference se-
quence y. These can all be solved using dynamic programming. For simplicity, we will assume
zeroth order Markov dependencies between the yi s. Extensions to the kth order Markov dependen-
cies should be straightforward. Since each of these algorithms relies on the forward and reverse
segment embeddings, we first discuss how these can be computed before going on to the inference
algorithms.


3.1   C OMPUTING S EGMENT E MBEDDINGS
         →
         −                  −−−→
Let the h i,j designate the RNN encoding of the input span (i, j), traversing from left to right, and
    ←
    −                                                    ←−−−
let h i,j designate the reverse direction encoding using RNN. There are thus O(|x|2 ) vectors that
must be computed, each of length O(|x|). Naively this can be computed in time O(|x|3 ), but the


                                                                        3
