                                         Workshop track - ICLR 2016




                                         D OCUMENT C ONTEXT L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                                           Yangfeng Ji1 , Trevor Cohn2 , Lingpeng Kong3 , Chris Dyer3 & Jacob Eisenstein1
                                          1
                                            School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
                                          2
                                            Department of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne
                                          3
                                            School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University



                                                                                     A BSTRACT




arXiv:1511.03962v4 [cs.CL] 21 Feb 2016
                                                  Text documents are structured on multiple levels of detail: individual words are re-
                                                  lated by syntax, and larger units of text are related by discourse structure. Existing
                                                  language models generally fail to account for discourse structure, but it is crucial
                                                  if we are to have language models that reward coherence and generate coherent
                                                  texts. We present and empirically evaluate a set of multi-level recurrent neural net-
                                                  work language models, called Document-Context Language Models (DCLMs),
                                                  which incorporate contextual information both within and beyond the sentence.
                                                  In comparison with sentence-level recurrent neural network language models, the
                                                  DCLMs obtain slightly better predictive likelihoods, and considerably better as-
                                                  sessments of document coherence.


                                         1    I NTRODUCTION
                                         Statistical language models are essential components of natural language processing systems, such
                                         as machine translation (Koehn, 2009), automatic speech recognition (Jurafsky & Martin, 2000),
                                         text generation (Sordoni et al., 2015) and information retrieval (Manning et al., 2008). Language
                                         models estimate the probability of a word for a given context. In conventional language models,
                                         context is represented by n-grams, so these models condition on a fixed number of preceding words.
                                         Recurrent Neural Network Language Models (RNNLMs; Mikolov et al., 2010) use a dense vector
                                         representation to summarize context across all preceding words within the same sentence. But
                                         context operates on multiple levels of detail: on the syntactic level, a word’s immediate neighbors
                                         are most predictive; but on the level of discourse and topic, all words in the document lend contextual
                                         information.
                                         Recent research has developed a variety of ways to incorporate document-level contextual informa-
                                         tion. For example, both Mikolov & Zweig (2012) and Le & Mikolov (2014) use topic information
                                         extracted from the entire document to help predict words in each sentence; Lin et al. (2015) propose
                                         to construct contextual information by predicting the bag-of-words representation of the previous
                                         sentence with a separate model; Wang & Cho (2015) build a bag-of-words context from the pre-
                                         vious sentence and integrate it into the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) generating the current
                                         sentence. These models are all hybrid architectures in that they are recurrent at the sentence level,
                                         but use a different architecture to summarize the context outside the sentence.
                                         In this paper, we explore multi-level recurrent architectures for combining local and global infor-
                                         mation in language modeling. The simplest such model would be to train a single RNN, ignoring
                                         sentence boundaries: as shown in Figure 1, the last hidden state from the previous sentence t − 1 is
                                         used to initialize the first hidden state in sentence t. In such an architecture, the length of the RNN
                                         is equal to the number of tokens in the document; in typical genres such as news texts, this means
                                         training RNNs from sequences of several hundred tokens, which introduces two problems:
                                         Information decay In a sentence with thirty tokens (not unusual in news text), the contextual in-
                                                formation from the previous sentence must be propagated through the recurrent dynamics
                                                thirty times before it can reach the last token of the current sentence. Meaningful document-
                                                level information is unlikely to survive such a long pipeline.
                                         Learning It is notoriously difficult to train recurrent architectures that involve many time
                                                steps (Bengio et al., 1994). In the case of an RNN trained on an entire document, back-
                                                propagation would have to run over hundreds of steps, posing severe numerical challenges.


                                                                                            1
Workshop track - ICLR 2016



                     y t −1,1   y t −1,2   y t −1, M −1   y t −1, M       y t ,1   y t ,2   y t , N−1    yt , N




                     x t −1,1   x t −1,2   x t −1, M −1   x t −1, M       xt , 1   xt , 2   x t , N −1   xt , N


Figure 1: A fragment of document-level recurrent neural network language model (D R NNLM). It is
also an extension of sentence-level RNNLM to the document level by ignoring sentence boundaries.

In this paper, we use multi-level recurrent structures to solve both of these problems, thereby suc-
cessfully efficiently leveraging document-level context in language modeling. We present several
variant Document-Context Language Models (DCLMs), and evaluate them on predictive likelihood
and their ability to capture document coherence.

2     M ODELING FRAMEWORK
The core modeling idea of this work is to integrate contextual information from the RNN language
model of the previous sentence into the language model of the current sentence. We present three
alternative models, each with various practical or theoretical merits, and then evaluate them in sec-
tion 4.

2.1   R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORK L ANGUAGE M ODELS

We start from a recurrent neural network language model (R NNLM) to explain some necessary terms.
Given a sentence {xn }Nn=1 , a recurrent neural network language model is defined as
                                    hn =g (hn−1 , xn )                                        (1)
                                     yn =softmax (Wo hn + b) ,                                (2)
where xn ∈ RK is the distributed representation of the n-th word, hn ∈ RH is the corresponding
hidden state computed from the word representation and the previous hidden state hn−1 , and b
is the bias term. K and H are the input and hidden dimension respectively. As in the original
RNNLM (Mikolov et al., 2010), yn is a prediction of the (n + 1)-th word in the sequence.
The transition function g (·) could be any nonlinear function used in neural networks, such as the
elementwise sigmoid function, or more complex recurrent functions such as the LSTM (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) or GRU (Chung et al., 2014). In this work, we use LSTM, as it consistently
gives the best performance in our experiments. By stacking two LSTM together, we are able obtain
a even more powerful transition function, called multi-layer LSTM (Sutskever et al., 2014). In a
multi-layer LSTM, the hidden state from a lower-layer LSTM cell is used as the input to the upper-
layer, and the hidden state from the final-layer is used for prediction. In our following models, we
fix the number of layers as two.
In the rest of this section, we will consider different ways to employ the contextual information for
document-level language modeling. All models obtain the contextual representation from the hidden
states of the previous sentence, but they use this information in different ways.

2.2   M ODEL I: C ONTEXT- TO -C ONTEXT DCLM

The underlying assumption of this work is that contextual information from previous sentences
needs to be able to “short-circuit” the standard RNN, so as to more directly impact the generation
of words across longer spans of text. We first consider the relevant contextual information to be the
final hidden representation from the previous sentence t − 1, so that,
                                           ct−1 = ht−1,M                                          (3)
where M is the length of sentence t − 1. We then create additional paths for this information to
impact each hidden representation in the current sentence t. Writing xt,n for the word representation
of the n-th word in the t-th sentence, we have,
                                  ht,n =gθ (ht,n−1 , s (xt,n , ct−1 ))                            (4)


                                                                      2
Workshop track - ICLR 2016



                                                  y t ,1   y t ,2     y t , N−1    yt , N



 y t −1,1   y t −1,2   y t −1, M −1   y t −1, M                                                 y t −1,1   y t −1,2   y t −1, M −1   y t −1, M   y t ,1   y t ,2   y t , N−1    yt , N



                                                  xt , 1   xt , 2     x t , N −1   xt , N


 x t −1,1   x t −1,2   x t −1, M −1   x t −1, M                                                 x t −1,1   x t −1,2   x t −1, M −1   x t −1, M   xt , 1   xt , 2   x t , N −1   xt , N

                                      (a) CC DCLM                                                                                    (b) CO DCLM

                                         Figure 2: Context-to-context and context-to-output DCLMs


where gθ (·) is the activation function parameterized by θ and s (·) is a function that combines the
context vector with the input xt,n for the hidden state. In future work we may consider a variety of
forms for this function, but here we simply concatenate the representations,
                                                              s (xt,n , ct−1 ) = [xt,n , ct−1 ].                                                                                 (5)
The emission probability for yt,n is then computed from ht,n as in the standard RNNLM (Equa-
tion 2). The underlying assumption of this model is that contextual information should impact the
generation of each word in the current sentence. The model therefore introduces computational
“short-circuits” for cross-sentence information, as illustrated in Figure 2(a). Because information
flows from one hidden vector to another, we call this the context-to-context Document Context
Language Model, abbreviated CC DCLM.
With this specific architecture, the number of parameters is H(16H + 3K + 6) + V (H + K + 1),
where H is the size of the hidden representation, K is the size of the word representation, and V is
the vocabulary size. The constant factors come with the weight matrices within a two-layer LSTM
unit. This is in the same complexity class as the standard RNNLM. Special handling is necessary
for the first sentence of the document. Inspired by the idea of sentence-level language modeling, we
introduce a dummy contextual representation c0 as a S TART symbol for a document. This is another
parameter to be learned jointly with the other parameters in this model.
The training procedure of CC DCLM is similar to a conventional RNNLM: we move from left to
right through the document and compute a softmax loss on each output yt,n . We then backpropagate
this loss through the entire sequences.

2.2.1          M ODEL II: C ONTEXT- TO -O UTPUT DCLM
Rather than incorporating the document context into the recurrent definition of the hidden state, we
can push it directly to the output, as illustrated in Figure 2(b). Let ht,n be the hidden state from a
conventional RNNLM of sentence t,
                                                                    ht,n = gθ (ht,n−1 , xt,n ) .                                                                                 (6)
Then, the context vector ct−1 is directly used in the output layer as
                                                  yt,n ∼ softmax (Wh ht,n + Wc ct−1 + b)                                                                                         (7)
where ct−1 is defined in Equation 3. Because the document context impacts the output directly, we
call this model the context-to-output DCLM (CO DCLM). The modification on the model archi-
tecture from CC DCLM to CO DCLM leads to a notable change on the number of parameters. The
total number of parameters of CO DCLM is H(13H + 3K + 6) + V (2H + K + 1). The difference
of the parameter numbers between these CO DCLM and CC DCLM is V H − 3H 2 . Recall that V is
the vocabulary size and H is the size of latent representation, in most cases we have V ≥ 104 and
H ≈ 102 . Therefore V  H in all reasonable cases, and CO DCLM includes more parameters than
CC DCLM in general.

While the CO DCLM has more parameters that must be learned, it has a potentially important com-
putational advantage. By shifting ct−1 from hidden layer to output layer, the relationship of any two
hidden vectors ht and ht0 from different sentences is decoupled, so that each can be computed in
isolation. In a guided language generation scenario such as machine translation or speech recogni-
tion — the most common use case of neural language models — this means that decoding decisions
are only pairwise dependent across sentences. This is in contrast with the CC DCLM, where the


                                                                                            3
