                                             Language Versatilists vs. Specialists: An Empirical
                                                Revisiting on Multilingual Transfer Ability


                                                                             Jiacheng Ye, Xijia Tao, Lingpeng Kong
                                                                                  The University of Hong Kong
                                                                                {jcye2,xjtao,lpk}@cs.hku.hk




arXiv:2306.06688v1 [cs.CL] 11 Jun 2023
                                                                                             Abstract

                                                      Multilingual transfer ability, which reflects how well the models fine-tuned on
                                                      one source language can be applied to other languages, has been well studied
                                                      in multilingual pre-trained models (e.g., BLOOM [32]). However, such ability
                                                      has not been investigated for English-centric models (e.g., LLaMA [35]). To
                                                      fill this gap, we study the following research questions. First, does multilingual
                                                      transfer ability exist in English-centric models and how does it compare with
                                                      multilingual pretrained models? Second, does it only appears when English is
                                                      the source language for the English-centric model? Third, how does it vary in
                                                      different tasks? We take multilingual reasoning ability as our focus and conduct
                                                      extensive experiments across four types of reasoning tasks. We find that the
                                                      multilingual pretrained model does not always outperform an English-centric
                                                      model. Furthermore, English appears to be a less suitable source language, and the
                                                      choice of source language becomes less important when the English-centric model
                                                      scales up. In addition, different types of tasks exhibit different multilingual transfer
                                                      abilities. These findings demonstrate that English-centric models not only possess
                                                      multilingual transfer ability but may even surpass the transferability of multilingual
                                                      pretrained models if well-trained. By showing the strength and weaknesses, the
                                                      experiments also provide valuable insights into enhancing multilingual reasoning
                                                      abilities for the English-centric models.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         Multilingual pre-training has become a standard technique to harness the cross-lingual transfer ability
                                         of a language model, through which it is possible to improve the performance on low-resource
                                         languages by leveraging high-resource languages [9, 11, 13, 21, 32]. However, there have been
                                         looming concerns regarding multilingual pre-training. For instance, Conneau et al. [11] uncovered
                                         the curse of multilinguality, suggesting for a fixed model size, cross-lingual performance increases
                                         with additional pretraining languages only up to a certain point, after which the performance begins
                                         to decline. Additionally, Wang et al. [37] also reported a phenomenon called negative interference,
                                         meaning the performance on both high-resource and low-resource languages degrade due to joint
                                         multilingual learning.
                                         English-centric models [2–5, 7, 35, 36, 44], on the other hand, have demonstrated strong performance
                                         on downstream English tasks, but their cross-lingual abilities have not been systematically analyzed.1
                                         While it may seem intuitive to assume that English-centric models are not well-suited in cross-
                                         lingual transfer, this is not necessarily the case in practice. Research evidence suggests that
                                         monolingual models are capable of learning certain abstractions that can generalize across languages,
                                         as demonstrated by Artetxe et al. [1]. In addition, it should be noted that English-centric models are
                                             1
                                                 In this paper, we refer to a model pre-trained primarily on English corpus as English-centric model.


                                         Preprint. Under review.
not limited to English only, as they have been exposed to some other languages, albeit to a much
lesser extent [5, 7, 14, 35].
The investigation of multilingual models and English-centric models is especially meaningful in
many practical settings. Suppose the goal is to develop a model with excellent multilingual reasoning
skills such as arithmetic, commonsense, and logical reasoning. In that case, how should we approach
this goal? Should we start from an English-centric model which has potentially superior English
reasoning abilities and hope these can be transferred to other languages? Or should we start with the
multilingual models which generally assumed to have better multilingual transferability, but may lag
behind in English reasoning skills?
In this paper, we investigate the following three research questions:

          • How does the backbone (e.g., a multilingual pre-trained model or an English-centric model)
            affect multilingual reasoning?
          • How does the source language used for downstream task finetuning affect multilingual
            reasoning on other target languages? For example, will English always be the most effective
            source language for English-centric models?
          • How does task type affect multilingual reasoning, e.g., will the reasoning ability be
            transferred better across languages in some reasoning tasks?

To answer these questions, we consider four tasks that require distinct types of reasoning,
namely Natural Language Inference, Logical Reasoning, Commonsense Reasoning, and Arithmetic
Reasoning, and three popular multilingual and English-centric models, i.e., BLOOM [32], Pythia [2]
and LLaMA [35]. We conduct extensive experiments in these multilingual downstream tasks, and
have the following key observations:

          • The multilingual pre-trained model does not always outperform an English-centric model,
            especially for languages seen or rarely seen for both models. For instance, LLaMA achieves
            a maximum of 9.9% and a minimum of 0.54% more average accuracy gain than BLOOM
            on Turkish and Greek, respectively, both are rarely seen for the two models (§3.2);
          • Incorporating a small amount of multilingual data during the pre-training stage can have
            a significant impact on English-centric models. For example, LLaMA trained on French
            and Spanish data with a size of approximately 50 times less than BLOOM, but outperforms
            BLOOM by up to 23% on these languages (§3.2);
          • The choice of language utilized during fine-tuning becomes less important when the English-
            centric model scales up (§3.3);
          • Different types of tasks show different multilingual transfer abilities, e.g., logical reasoning
            knowledge can be transferred better across languages than others. However, as the model
            size increases, this gap tends to narrow (§3.4).

The above findings offers new practical insights into both pre-training and fine-tuning stage of large
language models. The experiment code is publicly available to promote reproducibility and facilitate
further research.2

2       Language Versatilists and Specialists
In this section, we provide a brief overview of 1) multilingual pretraining, with a focus on 2) the
curse of multilingual pretraining, and then 3) discuss the English-centric pretraining, with 4) a series
of evidence to show the potential of English-centric model possessing multilingual transfer ability.
Based on the information presented, we will conclude this section by posing three research questions
for investigation.

Multilingual pre-training Multilingual pre-training offers a straightforward way to create language
versatilists [9, 13, 21, 32, 34, 42]. The main idea is to combine monolingual corpora in different
languages, upsampling those with less data, and training a regular language model on the combined
    2
        https://github.com/HKUNLP/multilingual-transfer


                                                      2
data. After learning multiple languages that use diverse scripts and belong to various language families,
the models are expected to possess cross-lingual transfer ability, i.e., the model can generalize to
target languages [17, 27, 40, 45] when downstream labeled training data is only available in the
source language, which is especially important for low-resource target languages [9].

Curse of multilingual pre-training Conneau et al. [9] demonstrated that including more languages
in a single model can improve performance for low-resource languages but hurt performance for
high-resource languages. Furthermore, Wang et al. [37] shows that negative interference between
languages also leads to degraded performance on low-resource languages. As such, prior work
had to find a trade-off between supporting more languages and obtaining better performance on a
certain set of languages, such as increasing model and vocabulary size [9, 37], and learning additional
language-specific parameters through adapters [26].

Table 1: Disk size (TB) of the pre-training data per language. 15 languages in the XNLI dataset are
shown and sorted by data size in BLOOM.
                   Language            Script               BLOOM LLaMA
                   English (EN)        Latin                   0.485     ∼4.666
                   Chinese (ZH)        Chinese ideograms       0.261         -
                   French (FR)         Latin                   0.208     ∼0.004
                   Spanish (ES)        Latin                   0.175     ∼0.004
                   Arabic (AR)         Arabic                  0.075         -
                   Vietnamese (VI) Latin                       0.043         -
                   Hindi (HI)          Devanagari              0.025         -
                   Urdu (UR)           Perso-Arabic            0.003         -
                   Swahili (SW)        Latin                  <0.001         -
                   Bulgarian (BG)      Cyrillic                  -       ∼0.004
                   Russian (RU)        Cyrillic                  -       ∼0.004
                   German (DE)         Latin                     -       ∼0.004
                   Turkish (TR)        Latin                     -           -
                   Greek (EL)          Greek                     -           -
                   Thai (TH)           Brahmic                   -           -


English-centric pre-training While only 13% of the world’s population speaks English, the vast
majority of NLP research is done on English. Consequently, numerous models are pre-trained using
a corpus that is primarily in English, while without explicitly excluding other languages during
data collection [2–5, 7, 35, 36, 44]. For example, English accounts for approximately 97.4% in the
Pile [14], an 825GB dataset used by many pre-trained models [2–4, 36], 93% in training data of GPT-
3 [5], and around 99% in training data of LLaMA [35]. In comparison, the largest constitution, i.e.,
English, only accounts for 30% in the ROOTS [18], which is the multilingual corpus for pretraining
BLOOM [32]. Table 1 compares the data size of the pretraining corpus for BLOOM and LLaMA
model across 15 languages from XNLI dataset [10].

Harbingers of multilingual transfer ability in English-centric models Multiple lines of evidence
suggest that English-centric models have the potential for multilingual transfer capability. On the one
hand, large English-centric models perform comparably with multilingual models on multilingual
question-answering tasks [7] and translating other languages into English [5, 7], though still lagging
behind in translating into other languages. On the other hand, prior work suggests that the source of
multilingual transfer ability may not be solely attributed to the multilingual pretraining process, as
monolingual models also learn some abstractions that generalize across languages [1]. High-level
knowledge-transferring phenomena have been observed in other modalities, such as from English to
Python [15], from ‘non-linguistic data with grammatical structure’ to language [25, 29], and from
language to vision [23]. Similarly, the presence of innate biological properties of the brain that
constrain possible human languages was posited to explain why children learn languages so quickly
despite the poverty of the stimulus [6, 20].

Research Questions After rethinking the challenge of multilingual pretraining and the potential of
English-centric training, to what extent multilingual transfer ability exists in English-centric models


                                                   3
