                                         Data Augmentation of Multi-turn Psychological Dialogue
                                          via Knowledge-driven Progressive Thought Prompting

                                         Jiyue Jiang1,2 , Liheng Chen1 , Sheng Wang1 , Lingpeng Kong1 , Yu Li2 , and Chuan Wu1
                                                                        1
                                                                           The University of Hong Kong
                                                                   2
                                                                       The Chinese University of Hong Kong




arXiv:2406.16567v1 [cs.CL] 24 Jun 2024
                                                Abstract. Existing dialogue data augmentation (DA) techniques predominantly
                                                focus on augmenting utterance-level dialogues, which makes it difficult to take
                                                dialogue contextual information into account. The advent of large language models
                                                (LLMs) has simplified the implementation of multi-turn dialogues. Due to absence
                                                of professional understanding and knowledge, it remains challenging to deliver
                                                satisfactory performance in low-resource domain, like psychological dialogue dia-
                                                logue. DA involves creating new training or prompting data based on the existing
                                                data, which help the model better understand and generate psychology-related
                                                responses. In this paper, we aim to address the issue of multi-turn dialogue data
                                                augmentation for boosted performance in the psychology domain. We propose a
                                                knowledge-driven progressive thought prompting method to guide LLM to gener-
                                                ate multi-turn psychology-related dialogue. This method integrates a progressive
                                                thought generator, a psychology knowledge generator, and a multi-turn dialogue
                                                generator. The thought generated by the progressive thought generator serves
                                                as a prompt to prevent the generated dialogue from having significant semantic
                                                deviations, while the psychology knowledge generator produces psychological
                                                knowledge to serve as the dialogue history for the LLM, guiding the dialogue
                                                generator to create multi-turn psychological dialogue. To ensure the precision of
                                                multi-turn psychological dialogue generation by LLM, a meticulous professional
                                                evaluation is required. Extensive experiments conducted on three datasets related
                                                to psychological dialogue verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

                                                Keywords: Data Augmentation · Psychological Dialogue · Prompting.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         Data augmentation (DA) of dialogues is a crucial technique in low-resource dialogue
                                         tasks. Lots of contemporary efforts are dedicated to exploring DA techniques to address
                                         the issue of insufficient data, that leads to sub-optimal dialogue performance. The
                                         majority of these studies [2,12,26] focus on augmenting utterance-level dialogue rather
                                         than the entire dialogue (i.e., multi-turn dialogue). Nevertheless, utterance-level dialogue
                                         DA struggles to effectively consider the contextual relationships. In contrast, multi-turn
                                         dialogue aims to generate new conversations based on dialogue history and context,
                                         which can naturally address the above issues. However, there are few methods for multi-
                                         turn dialogue DA, which primarily utilize technologies such as generative adversarial
                                         networks [25], while still facing challenges in handling longer dialogue history and
2             J. Author et al.

                      Original Multi-turn Dialogue                                                Multi-turn Dialogue after Data Augmentation
                                                                              Client: I have struggled with postpartum depression and am very concerned about
Client: I have experienced postpartum depression and am very concerned        other people's opinions. I constantly feel that people around me are talking behind
about other people's opinions. Now, I constantly feel that people around      my back, which makes me feel insecure.
me are talking behind my back, which makes me feel insecure.                  Therapist: How long have you been experiencing these feelings? How old is your
Therapist: How long have you been like this? How old is the baby?             child?
Client: My child is one or two years old.                                     Client: My child is one or two years old.
Therapist: Your current situation is not good for you. Are you unhappy now?   Therapist: It's essential to address your current emotional state, as it can impact your
Client: What should I do?                                                     well-being. Are you feeling unhappy at the moment?
Therapist: Have you ever been in therapy before?                              Client: What should I do to improve my situation?
Client: I have received treatment before and now I feel much better, but my   Therapist: Have you sought therapy before to help manage your emotions?
emotions are still unstable. I am a mother of two children and my life is     Client: I have undergone treatment in the past, which has helped me feel better.
currently okay, but I lack self-confidence and tend to overthink things.      However, my emotions are still unstable. As a mother of two, my life is manageable,
Therapist: Then it's necessary to continue with psychological counseling      but I struggle with self-confidence and tend to overthink things.
and work on managing your own emotions. A mother's emotions can affect        Therapist: In that case, it's crucial to continue with psychological counseling to help
her child and their development. You can come to consult, I think you can     you manage your emotions more effectively. A mother's emotions can influence her
overcome this emotion.                                                        child's development. Seeking professional consultation can help you overcome these
Client: I want to change myself now, but I can't change the environment       emotional challenges.
around me.                                                                    Client: I want to change myself, but I can't change my surroundings.
Therapist: You can change your mentality to avoid being influenced by the     Therapist: You can work on altering your mindset to minimize the impact of
outside world. You should view the rumors and gossip of others with a calm    external influences. Approach rumors and gossip with a calm and composed
perspective, be true to yourself, and not care about what others say.         perspective, stay true to yourself, and try not to be concerned with others' opinions.
                                                                              By doing so, you can build resilience and improve your emotional well-being.


            Progressive                          Multi-turn                                                       Large Language
                                                                               Prompts
         Thought Generator                   Dialogue Generator                                                       Model




Fig. 1. An example of data augmentation for multi-turn psychological dialogue based on the KPT
method. The bold and underlined words are keywords, indicating that the keywords did not change
significantly after the KPT processing (the contextual semantics did not undergo major changes).



domain-specific dialogue DA. The language representation and dialogue capabilities of
smaller models are significantly lower than those of the currently popular LLMs.
    The advent of LLMs has brought numerous exciting developments in DA techniques.
Some studies [5,6] have demonstrated the remarkable efficacy of LLMs in the DA field.
psychological dialogue is a typical low-resource dialogue task. Previous methods are dif-
ficult to incorporate relevant knowledge and specific thinking patterns into psychological
dialogue while performing dialogue DA.
    Our goal is to address the data scarcity of psychological dialogue for better perfor-
mance in low-resource scenarios. Given the rigorous nature of psychological dialogues,
considering concrete contexts is preferred in multi-turn data augmentation. We propose
a novel Knowledge-driven Progressive Thought (KPT) prompting method. It includes
three components: a progressive thought generator, a psychological knowledge generator,
and a multi-turn dialogue generator. The progressive thought generator selects appro-
priate thoughts from a database to guide multi-turn dialogue generation and prevent
semantic deviations. The psychological knowledge generator provides the necessary
knowledge, while a penalty evaluation framework ensures dialogue quality. Figure 1
shows an example of KPT data augmentation for multi-turn psychological dialogue.
    In summary, our contributions are as follows: (1) We propose a progressive thought
generator, which produces progressive thought across multi-turn dialogue, effectively
referencing contextual information and preventing semantic errors in dialogue generation.
(2) We introduce a psychological knowledge generator designed to support the creation
of psychological knowledge and prompts, enabling better generation of psychological
dialogues. (3) By leveraging the powerful capabilities of LLMs in handling context, we
select and incorporate knowledge into the dialogue history, which prevents information
                                                        Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length                                           3

redundancy and ensures high-quality generation. (4) To ensure the precision of multi-
turn psychological dialogue generation by LLM, a meticulous professional evaluation
is required. Extensive experiments demonstrate the high quality of multi-turn dialogue
generated by KPT on three datasets related to psychological dialogue, and the superiority
of small models after training based on KPT augmented data.


                         Progressive            Progressive                Keyword
                                                                                                    LLM                   P.T. Keywords
                      Thought Generation         Thought               Extraction Prompt

     Dialogue Data
                                                  Psychological                             LLM Dialogue History
                                                   Knowledge                      The First History: Keywords_1 + Knowledge_1
                        Psychological
                                                                                 The Second History: Keywords_2 + Knowledge_2
                     Knowledge Generation                                         The Third History: Keywords_3 + Knowledge_3
                                                    Keywords                                           ... ...
                                                                                  The N-th History: Keywords_N + Knowledge_N



                                   PT BERT
                                             k.w. attention weights                                                         Multi-turn
                                                                                                                         Dialogue Prompt

                        Data Processing           PT BERT                 Augmented Multi-turn Dialogue                         LLM


     Final Dataset                                             The generated test differs too much from the source dialogue


                                 Fig. 2. The overview of the proposed KPT.




2        Method
The overview of our method is shown in Figure 2. Based on ChatGPT3 and BERT
[7], our proposed method KPT consists of three components: (1) Progressive thought
generator; (2) Psychological knowledge generator; and (3) Multi-turn dialogue generator.

2.1        Progressive Thought Generator
To generate progressive thoughts guiding LLMs in producing multi-turn dialogues with
minimal contextual semantic bias, we propose a prompt-based progressive thought
generator. As shown in Figure 3(a), the progressive thought generator comprises multi-
turn dialogue keyword selection, progressive thought database construction, and the
construction of prompts that facilitate progressive thoughts.
    (1) Multi-turn Dialogue Keyword Selection: We utilize semiotic stimulus (i.e., textual
prompt) as guiding keywords for extraction, which is defined as kw-prompt, to direct
LLM in generating dialogue keywords. The K-means algorithm is employed to cluster
these keywords into a maximum of five categories. To identify the most representative
category, a BERT model is used to extract attention weights from the conversation and
select keywords from the category with the highest average attention weight as candidate
keywords. (2) Progressive Thought Database Construction: Constructing prompts for
guiding progressive thought is similar to creating keyword extraction prompts. We
 3
      https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt
