                                         Preprint




                                         SubgoalXL: S UBGOAL - BASED E XPERT L EARNING FOR
                                         T HEOREM P ROVING
                                             Xueliang Zhao1∗ Lin Zheng1 Haige Bo2 Changran Hu2                Urmish Thakker2     Lingpeng Kong1
                                          1
                                             The University of Hong Kong 2 SambaNova Systems



                                                                                         A BSTRACT




arXiv:2408.11172v1 [cs.LG] 20 Aug 2024
                                                      Formal theorem proving, a field at the intersection of mathematics and computer
                                                      science, has seen renewed interest with advancements in large language models
                                                      (LLMs). This paper introduces SubgoalXL, a novel approach that synergizes
                                                      subgoal-based proofs with expert learning to enhance LLMs’ capabilities in formal
                                                      theorem proving within the Isabelle environment. SubgoalXL addresses two criti-
                                                      cal challenges: the scarcity of specialized mathematics and theorem-proving data,
                                                      and the need for improved multi-step reasoning abilities in LLMs. By optimiz-
                                                      ing data efficiency and employing subgoal-level supervision, SubgoalXL extracts
                                                      richer information from limited human-generated proofs. The framework inte-
                                                      grates subgoal-oriented proof strategies with an expert learning system, iteratively
                                                      refining formal statement, proof, and subgoal generators. Leveraging the Isabelle
                                                      environment’s advantages in subgoal-based proofs, SubgoalXL achieves a new
                                                      state-of-the-art performance of 56.1% in Isabelle on the standard miniF2F dataset,
                                                      marking an absolute improvement of 4.9%. Notably, SubgoalXL successfully
                                                      solves 41 AMC12, 9 AIME, and 3 IMO problems from miniF2F. These results
                                                      underscore the effectiveness of maximizing limited data utility and employing
                                                      targeted guidance for complex reasoning in formal theorem proving, contributing
                                                      to the ongoing advancement of AI reasoning capabilities. The implementation is
                                                      available at https://github.com/zhaoxlpku/SubgoalXL.


                                         1        I NTRODUCTION

                                         Formal theorem proving, a field at the intersection of mathematics and computer science, has flour-
                                         ished alongside the development of languages like Lean (de Moura et al., 2015) and Isabelle (Paulson,
                                         1994). These two prominent communities have been instrumental in advancing the field’s core
                                         challenge: mechanizing mathematical reasoning and proof verification (Li et al., 2020). Through the
                                         creation of rigorously verified proofs, this discipline strengthens the foundations of mathematical
                                         certainty, potentially opening doors to new mathematical discoveries.
                                         The field has recently garnered renewed attention, driven by advancements in artificial intelligence,
                                         particularly in large language models (LLMs). The significance of this resurgence lies in its potential
                                         to push the boundaries of reasoning capabilities in modern AI methods, especially LLMs (Wu et al.,
                                         2022; Jiang et al., 2022a; Zhao et al., 2024; Xin et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024). Formal theorem proving
                                         represents a new frontier in AI reasoning, challenging LLMs to perform complex, logically rigorous
                                         tasks that were previously considered beyond their capabilities. From an application perspective,
                                         this breakthrough in language models’ ability to engage in sophisticated mathematical reasoning
                                         has profound implications that reach far beyond pure mathematics, extending to various fields of
                                         scientific research and automated decision-making systems.
                                         In this work, we introduce SubgoalXL (Figure 1), a novel approach that synergizes subgoal-based
                                         proofs with expert learning to enhance LLMs’ capabilities in formal theorem proving. SubgoalXL
                                         tackles the scarcity of specialized mathematics and theorem proving data (Lin et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
                                         2024) by optimizing data efficiency, extracting richer information from limited human-generated
                                         proofs. Concurrently, it augments LLMs’ multi-step reasoning abilities through subgoal-level super-
                                         vision. At its core, SubgoalXL integrates subgoal-oriented proof strategies with an expert learning
                                              ∗
                                                  Corresponding author: Xueliang Zhao (xlzhao22@connect.hku.hk).


                                                                                               1
Preprint




                     Informal Statement
 When Rachel divides her favorite number by 7, she gets a
 remainder of 5. What will the remainder be if she multiplies                                                    rate                             Sc
                                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                                                            ne                                        e
 her favorite number by 5 and then divides by 7? Show that it                                            Ge
                                                                                                                           F. Proof
 is 4.                                                                                                                    Generator

                         Informal Proof                         Formal     Informal Formal
 Let 𝑛 be Rachel's favorite number. Then 𝑛 ≡ 5 (mod 7), so       Stat.               Proof    Subgoal
                                                                             Stat.                                                                  pl
                                                                                             Generator Up                                              e
 5𝑛 ≡ 5 . 5 ≡ 25 ≡ 4 (mod 7).                                                                                da
                                                                                                               te
                                                                                                                                              Sa
                                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                        Subgoal-based
           Formal Statement + Formal Proof                                                                                  Proof
       (Subgoal-Based Proof as Inline Comments)
 theorem mathd_numbertheory_335:
   fixes n :: nat
   assumes h0 : "n mod 7 = 5"                                                                               rate                     Sc
                                                                                                       ne                              or
                                                                                                    Ge                                   e
   shows "(5 * n) mod 7 = 4"                                                                                        Subgoal
 proof -                                                                                                           Generator
   (* Step 1: Given 𝑛 ≡ 5 (mod 7), substitute 5 for 𝑛 in
  5 ∗ 𝑛 mod 7. *)                                               Informal     Subgoal-based    F. Stat.
   have c0: "(5 * n) mod 7 = (5 * 5) mod 7"                       Stat.          Proof       Generator
                                                                                                                                           pl
     using h0                                                                                       Up
                                                                                                      da                             Sa
                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                        te                             m
     by simp
                                                                                                                        Formal
                                                                                                                         Stat.
    (* Step 2: Calculate 25 mod 7 = 4. *)
    then have "\<dots> = 4"
      by simp

    (* Step 3: Thus, 5 ∗ 𝑛 mod 7 simplifies to 4. *)                                                                           ne   rate                            Score
                                                                                                                            Ge
    then have "(5 * n) mod 7 = 4"                                                                   Generate                                  P. Subgoal
      using c0                                                                                                                                Generator
      by simp
                                                                Informal     Subgoal-based    F. Stat.         F. Proof
                                                                  Stat.          Proof       Generator        Generator
  (* Therefore, the remainder when 5 times Rachel's favorite                                                                                                                      pl
                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                           Up                                                 m
 number is divided by 7 is 4. *)                                                                                             da
                                                                                                                               te                                           Sa
  then show ?thesis                                                                                                                         Formal         Formal
    by simp                                                                                                                                  Stat.          Proof
 qed



              (a) Subgoal-based Proof                                                (b) Expert Learning Framework

Figure 1: Left: Examples of informal statement, informal proof, formal statement, formal proof, and
subgoal-based proof. Right: Overview of the subgoal-based expert learning framework. Abbrevia-
tions: “Stat.” for “Statement”, “F.” for “Formal”, and “P.” for “Posterior”. Each iteration samples
subgoal-based proofs, formal statements, and formal proofs from their optimal distributions.


framework, iteratively refining formal statement, proof, and subgoal generators. By leveraging sam-
pling from estimated optimal distributions, SubgoalXL significantly elevates LLMs’ performance in
theorem-proving tasks, enhancing their capacity to navigate intricate logical structures and generate
more robust and precise formal proofs.
Leveraging the Isabelle environment’s advantages in subgoal-based proofs, SubgoalXL significantly
advances theorem-proving capabilities. It achieves a new state-of-the-art performance of 56.1% in
Isabelle on the standard miniF2F dataset (Zheng et al., 2021), an absolute improvement of 4.9% over
Zheng et al. (2023). SubgoalXL successfully solves 41 AMC12, 9 AIME, and 3 IMO problems
from miniF2F. The iterative expert learning process drives steady performance gains, underscoring
SubgoalXL’s robustness and effectiveness. These results highlight the critical role of maximizing
limited data utility and employing effective guidance for complex reasoning, complementing large-
scale data efforts (Wu et al., 2024; Xin et al., 2024a;b).


2        R ELATED W ORK

Formal theorem proving has advanced significantly through machine learning, focusing on enhancing
proof search strategies and leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) for autoformalization Polu
& Sutskever (2020); Polu et al. (2022); Jiang et al. (2022a). Improvements in the proof search
include self-supervised strategies in Expert Iteration (Polu et al., 2022) and PACT (Han et al., 2021),
integrations of language models with automated provers in HyperTree Proof Search (HTPS)(Lample
et al., 2022) and Thor(Jiang et al., 2022b), and transformer-based premise selection in Magnusham-
mer (Mikuła et al., 2023). Despite these advancements, scalability remains a challenge due to
the increasing complexity of theorems. The application of LLMs for autoformalization and proof
generation has also been explored, with Wu et al. (2022) and Jiang et al. (2022a) demonstrating
the conversion of mathematical problems into formal specifications. Baldur (First et al., 2023)
further enhances proving capabilities by producing full proofs and incorporating a proof repair model.
Additionally, LEGO-Prover (Xin et al., 2023) and Lyra Zheng et al. (2023) contribute uniquely to


                                                                            2
Preprint




theorem proving by focusing on the incremental development of reusable theorems and integrating
error messages from external verifiers for proof post-processing, respectively. DeepSeek-Prover (Xin
et al., 2024a) highlights the potential of large-scale synthetic data, while Lean-STaR (Lin et al., 2024)
leverages informal information to boost theorem-proving capabilities by training language models to
produce informal thoughts before each proof step. InternLM2-StepProver (Wu et al., 2024) addresses
data scarcity by utilizing extensive formal data from Lean 4 repositories on GitHub. Zhao et al. (2024)
introduce a subgoal-based demonstration learning framework that constructs and refines distinct
subgoals for each example, significantly enhancing proof search efficiency in LLMs.
Nevertheless, challenges remain in addressing data scarcity and enhancing deep, multi-step rea-
soning in formal theorem proving. Building upon the insights from subgoal-based demonstration
learning (Zhao et al., 2024), we introduce SubgoalXL, a novel framework that combines subgoal-
based proofs with an expert learning system. This approach iteratively enhances formal statement,
proof, and subgoal generation, aiming to improve data efficiency and achieve robust performance.
SubgoalXL complements existing methods by focusing on maximizing the utility of limited data and
refining complex reasoning strategies.


3     A PPROACH

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMALIZATION
                                                          |I|
Suppose we have an informal dataset I = {(sIi , piI )}i=1 , where sIi is an informal statement and
                                                                                     |F|
piI is an informal proof. Similarly, we have a formal dataset F = {(SiF , PiF )}i=1 , where SiF is a
                            F
formal statement and Pi is a formal proof. The goal is to train a language model pfpg (p, P | s, S)
using both I and F. Consequently, given a new informal statement s and its formal version S, the
model can generate both the informal proof p and the formal proof P, following the distribution
pfpg (p, P | s, S). In this paper, we treat (p, P) as a sequence of language tokens, with p representing
the prefix and P representing the suffix. In cases where an informal proof p is available, the model
can directly generate the formal proof P following pfpg (P | s, S, p).
The challenges mainly lie in (1) the limited effectiveness of informal proofs in I due to discrep-
ancies between human-written informal proofs and the established practices of formal proofs in
theorem-proving languages; and (2) the difficulty in constructing the full training dataset, which
requires aligned (s, S, p, P) quadruples. Inspired by Zhao et al. (2024), we use subgoal-based
proofs (Figure 1a) to replace informal proofs in I, achieving better consistency with the structure of
formal proofs (see §3.2). Additionally, we develop an expert learning framework (Figure 1b) that
samples (s, S, p, P) quadruples by estimating their optimal distributions through iterative refinement,
leveraging probabilistic modeling and gradient estimation techniques (see §3.3).

3.2   S UBGOAL - BASED P ROOF

To annotate subgoal-based proofs for the informal statements in I, we begin by manually creating
demonstration examples to serve as input for in-context learning (see Figure 1a). We select a subset
of problems from the miniF2F validation set and manually construct the verified formal proof for
each problem. Then, we prompt GPT-4o to generate subgoal-based proofs g, conditioned on the
informal statement s, formal statement S, and formal proof P. This process ensures that: (1) the
subgoal-based proofs are produced by autoregressive models; (2) they exhibit a consistent style,
reducing the learning burden, as noted by Gu et al. (2018); and (3) each subgoal corresponds to a
corresponding formal intermediate goal in Isabelle. These demonstrations are then used as in-context
examples to annotate subgoal-based proofs for the informal statements in I (see Appendix A for
further details).

3.3   S UBGOAL - BASED E XPERT L EARNING

We introduce the SubgoalXL framework, which comprises a formal proof generator (pfpg ), a formal
statement generator (pfsg ), and a subgoal generator (psg ). Inspired by gradient estimation in proba-
bilistic modeling (Schulman et al., 2015), this framework estimates optimal training data distributions


                                                   3
