                                        Under Review




                                        U NCERTAINTY RAG: S PAN -L EVEL U NCERTAINTY E N -
                                        HANCED L ONG -C ONTEXT M ODELING FOR R ETRIEVAL -
                                        AUGMENTED G ENERATION
                                          Zixuan Li1∗, Jing Xiong2∗, Fanghua Ye3 , Chuanyang Zheng4 , Jianqiao Lu2 , Zhongwei Wan8 ,
                                          Xun Wu7 , Xiaodan Liang1†, Chengming Li5†, Zhenan Sun6 , Lingpeng Kong2 , Ngai Wong2
                                         1
                                           SYSU 2 HKU 3 UCL 4 CUHK 5 SMBU 6 CAS 7 MSRA 8 OSU
                                                            lizx76@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, junexiong@connect.hku.hk




arXiv:2410.02719v1 [cs.CL] 3 Oct 2024
                                                                                       A BSTRACT

                                                     We present UncertaintyRAG, a novel approach for long-context Retrieval-
                                                     Augmented Generation (RAG) that utilizes Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)-based
                                                     span uncertainty to estimate similarity between text chunks. This span uncertainty
                                                     enhances model calibration, improving robustness and mitigating semantic incon-
                                                     sistencies introduced by random chunking. Leveraging this insight, we propose
                                                     an efficient unsupervised learning technique to train the retrieval model, alongside
                                                     an effective data sampling and scaling strategy. UncertaintyRAG outperforms
                                                     baselines by 2.03% on LLaMA-2-7B, achieving state-of-the-art results while using
                                                     only 4% of the training data compared to other advanced open-source retrieval
                                                     models under distribution shift settings. Our method demonstrates strong calibra-
                                                     tion through span uncertainty, leading to improved generalization and robustness
                                                     in long-context RAG tasks. Additionally, UncertaintyRAG provides a lightweight
                                                     retrieval model that can be integrated into any large language model with varying
                                                     context window lengths, without the need for fine-tuning, showcasing the flexibility
                                                     of our approach.


                                        1       I NTRODUCTION

                                        Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive capabilities across various natural language
                                        tasks, including long-context question-answering (QA), where the model processes a lengthy text
                                        and a question to generate a response (Caciularu et al., 2022). The QA paradigm encompasses a
                                        wide range of tasks, such as commonsense reasoning (Yang et al., 2018; Geva et al., 2021) and
                                        mathematical reasoning (Cobbe et al., 2021; Amini et al., 2019). However, due to the limitations in
                                        computational resources and the model’s lack of ability to extrapolate context length, handling long-
                                        context settings remains a challenge for large language models, although continuous improvements
                                        are being made in this area.
                                        Recent advances seek to overcome this limitation by designing linear attention mecha-
                                        nisms (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Gu & Dao, 2023), which improve the memory
                                        and time efficiency for long sequences. Pruning the KV cache (Ge et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024;
                                        Agarwal et al., 2024) and quantizing the KV cache (Hooper et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024) are other
                                        approaches to enhancing long context generation by compressing the model’s KV-cache, providing a
                                        training-free, lightweight solution to reduce memory and computational overhead. However, these
                                        methods are generally difficult to achieve context length extrapolation. Moreover, the aforementioned
                                        approaches usually truncate the long-context to just fit the context window of LLMs, which not only
                                        prevents LLMs from actually seeing the entire input text but also faces an unacceptable memory
                                        overhead in resource-constrained environments. The efficient positional encoding strategy (Liu et al.,
                                        2023a; Su et al., 2024) is a solution that can achieve length extrapolation, but it often requires training
                                        the entire LLMs.
                                            ∗
                                                These authors contributed equally.
                                            †
                                                Corresponding author.


                                                                                              1
Under Review




Another lightweight solution for handling long contexts is to utilize long-context Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) for long-context chunking (Xu et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2024b; Sarthi et al.,
2024; Xu et al., 2023a), which avoids the need for LLMs to have length extrapolation capability.
Long-context retrieval-augmented generation refers to a method in natural language processing where
a model retrieves relevant information from large external sources to assist in generating responses. It
extends the traditional RAG by handling much longer input contexts, enabling effective processing
of broader and more detailed information for tasks like question answering, summarization, and
document understanding. Typically, RAG employs existing LLMs with limited context windows
to retrieve relevant chunks, either with or without semantic truncation (Sarthi et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2024a; Jiang et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2023b;a). Retrieval models (Izacard et al., 2021; Xiao et al.,
2023b; Chen et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2023a) are commonly used for this purpose; however, they require
a large amount of high-quality labeled data for training, which limits their scalability and adaptability.
Modern RAG systems rely on complex chunking methods (Sarthi et al., 2024) and require LLMs
to have relatively long context windows (Jiang et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024). Furthermore, the
lack of labeled data to determine if (query, chunk) pairs are related (Lewis et al., 2020a;b) poses
significant limitations for training retrieval models in RAG systems. Recent research combines
RAG with long-context LLMs to handle extended contexts and mitigate semantic incoherence in
chunk processing (Xu et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024c; Luo
et al., 2024; Sarthi et al., 2024; Duarte et al., 2024). Some of the latest work also attempts to
inject retrieval capabilities into LLMs through training, enabling them to process and generate long
contexts directly (He et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024). However, these approaches often require either
sophisticated chunking strategies, which are time-consuming during inference, or fine-tuning adapters
for specific LLMs to manage chunk representation compression. Additionally, the complexity of
these methods makes them vulnerable to distribution shifts. Some methods also necessitate training
an LLM with an extended context window or new architecture, which is highly resource-intensive.
In contrast, improving a lightweight retrieval model that can be seamlessly integrated into various
LLMs without additional training would be a more efficient solution.
Unlike previous work, our focus is on utilizing calibrated uncertainty quantification to estimate
similarity between chunks, thereby training robust retrieval models within RAG. Specifically, we
introduce a novel uncertainty estimation technique based on the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), which
stabilizes predictions and reduces biases from random chunk splitting. Our analysis shows that
when two chunks are concatenated and fed into the model to estimate similarity, the uncertainty
measured by SNR can better reflect their alignment in the semantic space, which we have confirmed
in our experiments. Building on this finding, we develop an unsupervised learning technique to
train chunk embeddings. This method is decoupled from the long-context modeling capabilities of
LLMs and can be adapted to any fixed-length context window, enhancing retrieval robustness without
requiring additional fine-tuning or retraining of the LLM itself. By leveraging the LLM’s calibrated
self-information, we effectively measure similarity between text chunks, construct accurate positive
and negative samples, and train a robust retrieval model. This approach enhances generalization under
distribution shifts in long-context retrieval-augmented generation tasks. Moreover, it seamlessly
integrates with existing methods by relying solely on external retrieval models, thus avoiding LLM-
specific performance dependencies. Specifically, our contributions are as follows:

      1. We propose a novel SNR uncertainty measurement technique to achieve better calibration
         by addressing prediction errors arising from random chunk splitting, thereby improving
         performance in similarity estimation between chunks.

      2. We propose an unsupervised learning approach and train a retrieval model that outperforms
         strong open-source embedding models in long-context RAG tasks under distribution-shift
         settings.

      3. We design an efficient data sampling strategy to scale data, enhancing our retrieval model
         training and significantly boosting performance. Compared to models such as BGE-M3, our
         method improves LLaMA-2-7B by 2.03% after SNR calibration while using only 4% of
         their data size.

      4. We provide an in-depth analysis of the retrieval model, demonstrating continuous improve-
         ments across two key metrics. We explain how uncertainty measurement enhances chunk
         representation modeling and why data sample scaling contributes to improved performance.
                                                    2
Under Review




2     R ELATED W ORK
2.1   ATTENTION M ECHANISMS IN L ONG C ONTEXTS

An effective approach to facilitating long context is to avoid the O(n2 ) computational complexity
of the standard attention mechanism by designing linear attention mechanisms, sparse attention
mechanisms, or low-rank attention mechanisms. These works can be categorized into the following
four types: i) Sparse Attention Mechanisms: Reduce the computational burden of attention by
exploiting inherent patterns within the attention mechanism (Jiang et al., 2024a; Ribar et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023), or alternatively, by pruning the KV cache (Liu et al., 2023b; Xiao et al., 2023a;
Pang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). ii) The attention mechanism with linear complexity: This
typically involves transforming models with O(n2 ) complexity into O(n) or O(n log n) linear
attention (Zheng et al., 2022; Kitaev et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2022; Katharopoulos et al., 2020), or
efficient long-sequence recurrent neural networks (Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024; Peng et al.,
2023a; Yang et al., 2023). iii) Memory-augmented attention mechanisms: This typically involves
encoding long-context text using additional memory blocks (He et al., 2024; Bertsch et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024). iv) Hardware-friendly attention mechanisms: FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022;
Dao, 2023; Shah et al., 2024) accelerates precise attention computations by optimizing reads and
writes across different levels of GPU memory. FlashAttention is especially effective for processing
longer sequences. Among previous works, memory-augmented LLMs are most relevant to this study,
as they involve memory retrieval. However, they typically require modifying the original model
architecture and retraining the LLM or fine-tuning some parameters, which can be an impractical
overhead in certain settings.

2.2   P OSITION E NCODING

Extending the context window from scratch is challenging (Liu et al., 2023a; Su et al., 2024) because
it requires significant computational resources. As a result, efficient position encoding methods (Peng
et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023a; Chi et al., 2022; Press et al., 2021; Peng & Quesnelle, 2023) have
gained attention for improving length extrapolation. These works attempt to expand the context
window on pre-trained LLMs using a small amount of data.
However, considering that many LLMs are closed-source, fine-tuning these models specifically
for a retrieval model is impractical. Additionally, fully fine-tuning LLMs on long-context data
remains costly. Fully fine-tuning models such as LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), especially with
sequences longer than 16,000 tokens, is prohibitively expensive due to the quadratic time and memory
complexities associated with precise attention mechanisms. Therefore, extending the model’s context
window by continual training through position encoding remains unacceptable.
Recent RAG systems (Xu et al., 2023b; 2024) combining RAG with long context LLMs have utilized
position encoding to fine-tune LLMs for context window extrapolation, either requiring LLMs to
handle retrieved chunks as long-context inputs (Jiang et al., 2024b; Xu et al., 2024) or flexibly
combining the strengths of both through a routing mechanism (Li et al., 2024c). These works consider
combining the strengths of long context LLMs and RAG. They demonstrate that, when resources
are abundant, long context LLMs consistently outperform RAG in terms of average performance.
However, the significantly reduced cost of RAG remains a notable advantage. They also find that long-
context window LLMs can effectively alleviate the context fragmentation issue in RAG. However,
further extending the context window of LLMs still is challenging, as it requires a significant amount
of computational resources. Therefore, how to expand the boundaries of RAG systems given the
limited context window of LLMs remains a question worth exploring. Our work primarily focuses
on optimizing the retrieval model in RAG, given the context window length of LLMs, to extend the
boundaries of the RAG system’s ability to handle long contexts.

2.3   R ETRIEVAL -AUGMENTED G ENERATION

The existing RAG frameworks heavily rely on the quality of the retrieval model. Due to retrieval
model’s context window limitations, they often tend to use short retrieval units in open-domain QA
tasks (Lewis et al., 2020a; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Ni et al., 2021). These models rely on a bi-encoder
and typically require manual query-passage annotations for training the encoder.


                                                  3
