                                         B IO M AZE : B ENCHMARKING AND E NHANCING L ARGE
                                         L ANGUAGE M ODELS FOR B IOLOGICAL PATHWAY
                                         R EASONING
                                          Haiteng Zhao1 Chang Ma2 Fangzhi Xu3 Lingpeng Kong2 Zhi-Hong Deng1
                                          1
                                            Peking University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3
                                                                                              Xi’an Jiaotong University
                                          {zhaohaiteng, zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn
                                          {cma, lpk}@cs.hku.hk fangzhixu98@gmail.com




arXiv:2502.16660v5 [cs.LG] 22 Jul 2025
                                                                                      A BSTRACT

                                                  The applications of large language models (LLMs) in various biological do-
                                                  mains have been explored recently, but their reasoning ability in complex bio-
                                                  logical systems, such as pathways, remains underexplored, which is crucial for
                                                  predicting biological phenomena, formulating hypotheses, and designing exper-
                                                  iments. This work explores the potential of LLMs in pathway reasoning. We
                                                  introduce BioMaze, a dataset with 5.1K complex pathway problems derived
                                                  from real research, covering various biological contexts including natural dy-
                                                  namic changes, disturbances, additional intervention conditions, and multi-scale
                                                  research targets. Our evaluation of methods such as CoT and graph-augmented
                                                  reasoning, shows that LLMs struggle with pathway reasoning, especially in per-
                                                  turbed systems. To address this, we propose PATH S EEKER, an LLM agent that
                                                  enhances reasoning through interactive subgraph-based navigation, enabling a
                                                  more effective approach to handling the complexities of biological systems in
                                                  a scientifically aligned manner. The dataset and code are available at https:
                                                  //github.com/zhao-ht/BioMaze.


                                         1    I NTRODUCTION

                                         Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable performance across scien-
                                         tific domains, including mathematics (Yu et al., 2023), chemistry (Liu et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2022),
                                         biology (Hayes et al., 2024; Madani et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2023), and materials science (Zheng
                                         et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024). In biology, LLMs have shown promise in addressing complex tasks
                                         such as protein design (Valentini et al., 2023; Hosseini et al., 2024), drug discovery (M. Bran et al.,
                                         2024; Liu et al., 2023c), clinical trial analysis (Singhal et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023), and experiment
                                         design (AI4Science & Quantum, 2023; Roohani et al., 2024).
                                         Biological systems are composed of complex networks called pathways, involving genes, enzymes,
                                         substrates, and signaling molecules. Intervention in a single component—such as mutations or in-
                                         fections—can trigger multi-step cascades affecting other components within the organism. Despite
                                         the complex mechanisms in biological systems, deductive reasoning about the events within biolog-
                                         ical pathways can be carried out based on an understanding of the structure and function of these
                                         pathways. For example, based on pathway reasoning, it can be predicted that blocking muscarinic
                                         M3 receptors in taste cells will weaken taste responses in sensory fibers (see Figure 1).
                                         Pathway reasoning is essential for biologists to explain phenomena, form hypotheses, design exper-
                                         iments, and interpret results, and is a fundamental task in biology with broad applications across
                                         multiple disciplines, including systems biology, pharmacology, toxicology, cell biology, pathology,
                                         immunology, and biomedical engineering. The reasoning case in Figure 1 aid in toxicity analysis,
                                         experimental design, and taste disorders treatments.
                                         Although LLMs have been explored in various biological applications, little research has focused
                                         on how LLMs can understand and reason through the intricate, multi-step processes inherent to
                                         complex biological systems. Considering the fundamental role of biological pathway reasoning, the


                                                                                             1
          Question: When muscarinic receptors M3 are blocked in taste cells, what                                    Benchmark Paradigm 1: Internal Knowledge Pathway Reasoning
                 is the effect on taste-evoked responses in Receptor cells?
                                                                                                                          Chain of Thought
                                                                                                                      1. When muscarinic receptors, specifically the M3 subtype, are blocked in Type II taste
                            Extracellular space                                                  Taste
      Taste Transduction                                                                         Sensory Fiber           cells.
                                                                                                                      2. The effect on taste-evoked responses is generally a reduction in the calcium
           Pathway                                                                                                       mobilization and subsequent signaling pathways that mediate taste perception.
                                                  Acetylcholine                                                       3. Since ACh acts on these receptors to facilitate calcium influx and other signaling
                                                                                         ATP
                                                                                                                         events, blocking them would impair the normal excitatory responses to taste stimuli.


                                                                                                                     Benchmark Paradigm 2: External Knowledge Pathway Reasoning
                                                                                                                     PathSeeker       Call APIs to navigate pathway graph
                                                                                       CALMH1
                                                                                       Channel                            Pathways 5, 7, and 11 show that acetylcholine activation of CHRM3 increases calcium
                            M3 Receptor                β/γ                                                                mobilization in Type II taste cells, enhancing CALMH1's role in ATP release and
                                                   α
                                                                                                                          activating taste sensory fibers.
                                                                                Ca2+
                                                  Activated
                                                                                                                          Answer: Blocking muscarinic receptors inhibits M3 receptor activation, leading to
                                                                  Ca2+

      Taste Receptor Cell                         G-protein              Ca2+


                                                                                                 Neurotransmitters
                                                                                                                          reduced calcium mobilization in Type II taste cells. This decrease in calcium levels
                                                                                                                          results in lower ATP release, ultimately diminishing taste-evoked responses.




Figure 1: Illustration of BioMaze task and reasoning method with or without additional biological
pathway graph data guidance. The task of BioMaze focuses on reasoning about the effects and
mechanisms of natural components or synthetic interventions on various downstream targets under
different conditions through complex intermediate pathway processes.

potential applications of LLMs in many areas of biology would be questionable if LLMs cannot
effectively perform this task.
In this study, we evaluate the reasoning abilities of LLMs in biological tasks through the lens of
biological pathways. We explore their capabilities in key pathway reasoning paradigms, including
functional understanding, dynamic changes, regulation, and intervention. To support these studies,
we introduce a pathway benchmark, BioMaze, which contains 5.1K high-quality, complex biolog-
ical pathway problems derived from real research literature, such as PubMed (Lu, 2011). These
problems are carefully curated and reviewed by human experts, covering the context of biological
pathway research, including natural dynamic changes, disturbances and interventions, additional
intervention conditions, as well as multi-scale research targets, such as single factors, interaction
processes, and macro-level functions.
Based on BioMaze, we compare various methods using LLMs for pathway reasoning, including
chain-of-thought (CoT) and graph-augmented reasoning approaches (Li et al., 2023a; Sun et al.,
2023; He et al., 2024). The results demonstrate that LLMs struggle with pathway reasoning, par-
ticularly in causal inference scenarios where interventions and perturbations are introduced into
the system. This challenge persists across all LLMs, from LLaMA 8B to GPT-4. The pathway
knowledge of LLMs comes from the biological pathway corpus during pre-training, which lacks
a structured organization, making it difficult to plan reasoning paths based on pathway structures.
This leads to errors such as faulty steps and omissions, and difficulty in simulating the events in the
pathway during interventions. Additionally, current graph-augmented reasoning methods lack the
ability to efficiently leverage pathway graphs during reasoning.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach called PATH S EEKER, an LLM agent
designed to emulate the way scientists reason using biological pathways. During inference, it in-
teractively explores biological pathways by efficiently navigating global-local subgraphs based on
demand. This interactive process establishes a mutually reinforcing relationship between inference
and pathway browsing, helping LLMs utilize pathway data for reasoning. It addresses challenges
such as interventions and perturbations, long reasoning chains, and errors.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Biological Scientific Question Answering Previous studies have explored the potential of language
models in the biological scientific domain (Lu et al., 2022; Vilares & Gómez-Rodrı́guez, 2019; Jin
et al., 2021; Pal et al., 2022), such as biological scientific reading comprehension (Welbl et al.,
2018; Jin et al., 2019) and question-answering (Krithara et al., 2023). A few studies have examined
language models’ ability to complete biological pathways (Li et al., 2023b; Park et al., 2023; Azam
et al., 2024). Different from previous tasks, this work introduces biological pathway reasoning in
realistic research scenarios. See Appendix A.12 for a more detailed comparison.
Graph-augmented Language Model Several studies have explored augmenting LLMs with graph
data. In particular, some works enhance LLMs by encoding graph data as text (Ye et al., 2023;


                                                                                                                        2
Wang et al., 2024; Fatemi et al., 2023), or tuning LLMs specifically for graph-based tasks (Liu et al.,
2023a; Tang et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2023; He & Hooi, 2024). Augmented LLMs
have been applied to knowledge-based QA (Sun et al., 2023; He et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Jin
et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024; Edge et al., 2024) and graph tasks like property prediction (Wang
et al., 2024; He et al., 2023). Some studies leverage graph structures for complex reasoning tasks
(Jiang et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2024). Most large graph databases use retrieval mechanisms (He
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023a), while others employ LLMs as interactive agents for navigation (Sun
et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). This work introduces a more efficient agent-based
approach using subgraph navigation and reasoning to improve pathway database exploration.


3     B ENCHMARK : B IO M AZE

3.1   DATASET C REATION

BioMaze is created by generating question-answer pairs from biological pathway research papers,
which are then checked and filtered through a combination of automated methods and expert human
review. The dataset creation process involves prompting large language models, with GPT-4 and
LLaMA3.1-405B (Dubey et al., 2024) being selected for data generation in this study.
To gather relevant biological pathway questions in realistic scientific research contexts, particularly
those involving interventions, the data for BioMaze is sourced from over 6,000 biological pathway
research papers. These studies include carefully designed experimental interventions supported by
pathway mechanisms to observe biological system responses. After extracting detailed experimental
observations and their contexts, we convert each one into either a True/False or open-ended question,
depending on its content. Each question is paired with corresponding labeled answers.
We then apply multiple data filters and human expert reviews to ensure the accuracy and quality
of the questions. The accuracy of each question is validated by comparing it with the content of
the original paper. Question quality is ensured through several filters that remove questions that
are poorly defined, ask for specific measurement values, query more than one fact, are trivial (with
answers revealed in the question’s context), or are unrelated to biological pathways.
Finally, all questions are reviewed by human experts based on quality dimensions and their judgment
to ensure overall question quality. The passing rate for expert review is approximately 40%. After
applying all filters, BioMaze contains 5.1k high-quality questions. More details are provided in
Appendix A.2.
The questions of BioMaze cover a wide range of biological domains, as illustrated in Figure 2 (left).

3.2   R EASONING T YPE C ATEGORIES

To study various research scenarios in biological pathways, such as natural dynamic changes, dis-
turbances and interventions, and additional intervention conditions, as well as a multi-scale under-
standing of single factors, action processes, and macroscopic functions, we classify BioMaze tasks
from three dimensions, namely inquiry type, extra condition, and investigation target, as shown in
Table 1. More full question cases are in Appendix A.1. The distribution of the three dimensions’
questions is shown in Figure 2 (right). We introduce each category of the dimensions below:
Dimension 1: Inquiry Type is the independent variable studied, which can be either Normal
Source, involving the prediction of the effects of natural components in their normal state within a
biological pathway, or Perturbed Source, which deals with predicting the effects of external inter-
ventions or treatments—such as mutations, infections, or experimentally introduced elements—on
downstream targets within pathways. Normal Source tasks focus on understanding the fundamental
mechanisms and natural dynamics of pathways, while Perturbed Source tasks examine the phe-
nomenon under perturbation.
Dimension 2: Extra Condition refers to additional settings besides the independent variable. This
could be the Natural Condition, where no additional treatments are applied, and the pathway op-
erates under the organism’s natural conditions, or the Intervened Condition, which assesses the
impact of the inquiry source when the pathway has already been influenced by other factors, such as


                                                  3
