                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                                         ATTS: A SYNCHRONOUS T EST-T IME S CALING VIA
                                         C ONFORMAL P REDICTION
                                          Jing Xiong1∗, Qiujiang Chen1∗, Fanghua Ye4 , Zhongwei Wan2 , Chuanyang Zheng5
                                          Hui Shen1 , Chenyang Zhao2 , Hanbo Li3 , Chaofan Tao3 , Haochen Tan3
                                          Haoli Bai3 , Lifeng Shang3 , Lingpeng Kong1 , Ngai Wong1
                                          1                                        2                           3
                                              The University of Hong Kong            Independent Researcher      Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
                                          4                                   5
                                              University College London           The Chinese University of Hong Kong

                                                    https://github.com/menik1126/Asynchronous-Test-Time-Scaling




arXiv:2509.15148v3 [cs.CL] 24 Feb 2026
                                                                                            A BSTRACT
                                                       Large language models (LLMs) benefit from test-time scaling but are often ham-
                                                       pered by high inference latency. Speculative decoding is a natural way to accel-
                                                       erate the scaling process; however, scaling along both the parallel and sequential
                                                       dimensions poses significant challenges, including substantial memory-bound ex-
                                                       ecution and synchronization overhead. We introduce ATTS (Asynchronous Test-
                                                       Time Scaling), a statistically guaranteed adaptive scaling framework that follows
                                                       the hypothesis testing process to address these challenges. By revisiting arithmetic
                                                       intensity, ATTS identifies synchronization as the primary bottleneck. It enables
                                                       asynchronous inference through online calibration and proposes an ordinal classi-
                                                       fication algorithm that supports a three-stage rejection sampling pipeline, scaling
                                                       along both the sequential and parallel axes. Across experiments on the MATH,
                                                       AMC23, AIME24, and AIME25 datasets and across multiple draft–target model
                                                       families, we show that ATTS delivers up to 56.7x speedup in test-time scaling and
                                                       a 4.14x throughput improvement, while maintaining accurate control of the rejec-
                                                       tion rate, reducing latency and memory overhead, and incurring no accuracy loss.
                                                       By scaling both in parallel and sequential dimensions, we enable the 1.5B/70B
                                                       draft/target model combination to achieve the performance of the state-of-the-art
                                                       reasoning model o3-mini (high) on the AIME dataset.

                                         1        I NTRODUCTION
                                         With the rapid advances in large language models (LLMs), attention is increasingly turning to
                                         reasoning models (Guo et al., 2025; Muennighoff et al., 2025; McCoy et al., 2024; Shao et al.,
                                         2024)—systems that transcend next-token prediction in order to emulate human-like reasoning be-
                                         haviors. These models excel at leveraging complex reasoning chains, especially in test-time scaling
                                         settings (Snell et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025; Muennighoff et al., 2025; Zeng et al., 2025), and have
                                         shown strong potential in mathematical reasoning (Xiong et al., 2022; 2023b;a).
                                         Test-time scaling (Chen et al., 2025; Muennighoff et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025) constitutes a new
                                         paradigm that enhances the model’s reasoning capabilities by allocating additional computational
                                         resources during the inference stage. Typically, test-time scaling can be categorized into two ap-
                                         proaches: sequential scaling (Muennighoff et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025) and parallel scaling (Chen
                                         et al., 2025). However, despite its potential, the challenge of efficiently managing increasing sam-
                                         pling size or complexity during inference remains a critical limitation, hindering the achievement of
                                         high-performance deployment.
                                         Benefiting from the shared-prefix mechanism of the inference engines (Kwon et al., 2023; Zheng
                                         et al., 2024), parallel scaling (Chen et al., 2025) increases the number of samples concurrently,
                                         thereby partially mitigating the inference-time latency and memory footprint introduced by scaling
                                         the per-trajectory token budget (i.e., longer reasoning paths), while simultaneously improving token-
                                         sampling throughput.
                                         Although some methods (Huang et al., 2025; Wan et al., 2024) that adopt confidence-based early
                                         stopping of reasoning chains improve parallel sampling efficiency, problems still remain in memory
                                              ∗
                                                  Contact Email: junexiong@connect.hku.hk, Equal contribution.


                                                                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




efficiency and high inference latency. Another potential issue is that early stopping prunes away
potentially correct reasoning paths and reduces the diversity of the output space.
                                                            Memory (GB)
Speculative decoding (Li et al., 2024a; Leviathan            75
                                                                          Static Param.               Dynamic Mem.

et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2025b;                                                                     73.5


Yang et al., 2025) represents a promising approach
                                                             70
for accelerating decoding. In this framework, a                                                                67.9
lightweight draft model generates tokens, which
are subsequently validated and refined by a target           65
                                                                                              62.8
model. This dual-phase approach not only speeds
up inference by offloading most of the generation            60   59.5
                                                                               60.0

process to the draft model, but also ensures that the
final outputs retain high fidelity, thereby achieving a      55                                                               Sample Size
favorable balance between efficiency and accuracy.                   1             4             16          32       64

                                                          Figure 1: Memory Overhead vs. Sampling
However, when speculative decoding (Pan et al., Sizes (QwQ 32B, Token Budget 500)
2025b; Yang et al., 2025) meets test-time scaling,
the decoding process faces two key challenges. The first is the memory bottleneck of the target
model during the prefill phase. As shown in Figure 1, as the number of sampling increases, the
memory overhead of the target model tends to grow due to KV cache accumulation. This effect
becomes more pronounced in target models when attempting to scale the number of requests from
the draft model. During real-world deployment on the SGLang server (Zheng et al., 2024), high-
concurrency sampling, especially when simultaneously validating multiple long reasoning chains,
can lead to memory peaks that easily exceed the GPU’s maximum capacity, causing the server to
crash. Therefore, it is crucial to constrain the request budget from the draft model to the target model
within a manageable range.
Synchronous                                                                                                  Done             Draft Model Prefill
Speculative                                                                                                                   Draft Model Decode
 Decoding                                                                                                                     Base Model Prefill
                                                                                                                              Base Model Decode
                                                                                                                              Bubble
                                                                                                                              End Generation



Asynchronous
                                                                                       Done
 Speculative
  Decoding




                Figure 2: Comparison of naive and asynchronous speculative decoding.
In speculative decoding, one stage involves rejection sampling: prior to acceptance, the target model
either ranks draft-generated candidates or computes a divergence between the draft and target dis-
tributions, introducing an additional synchronization overhead bottleneck. As illustrated in Fig. 2,
during the multi-turn sampling process (with a sampling quantity of 3 at each turn), if the target
model aims to reject the sampling with the lowest two confidences, a ranking operation must be per-
formed at each turn. Given the limited computational and memory resources, the target model needs
to prioritize processing the most important requests. Especially in test-time scaling, when combin-
ing sequential and parallel scaling, the synchronization overhead from precise budget control and
the pursuit of globally optimal ranking is amplified. Although this issue has been widely discussed
in the context of tool calls (Gim et al., 2024; Ginart et al., 2024), it has not been formally proposed
in the context of test-time scaling.
To analyze the synchronization bottleneck and address the two challenges mentioned above, we first
introduce a novel variant of arithmetic intensity called asynchronous arithmetic intensity to analyze
the system bottleneck, and then explore conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; 2003; Romano
et al., 2020; Lei et al., 2018) for ranking predictions to design the asynchronous algorithm. In our
formulation, conformal prediction defines a prediction set Cα ; sampling in Cα are rejected, while
sampling outside are accepted. This yields a distribution-free guarantee that the right sampling is
retained (i.e., lies outside Cα ) with high probability, enabling asynchronous test-time scaling. This
paper presents the following contributions:

         • We propose asynchronous arithmetic intensity, a performance metric designed to character-
           ize and quantify throughput/latency bottlenecks that emerge in test-time scaling scenarios.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




       • We introduce conformal prediction to tackle prediction ranking, and—leveraging the result-
         ing ranking—construct stable prediction sets that mitigate GPU-memory bottleneck risks.
       • We propose ATTS, a training-free, lossless acceleration method that achieves a 56.7x
         speedup in test-time scaling and a 4.14x throughput improvement in both sequential and
         parallel settings.

2    P RELIMINARY
We first introduce how to build the prediction set in the classical setup, and then present our setup.
Classic Setup.    Formally, let
                                                                        
                                   Dcal = (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )                               (1)

denote the calibration dataset. Each pair (Xi , Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , n is a data point, consisting of an
Xi (the input question for the i-th example) and a ground truth denoted as Yi . The symbol n denotes
the size of the calibration dataset. For each input Xi , we draw m candidate sampling

                                             (Ŷi1 , . . . , Ŷim ),                                   (2)

where m is the number of samples per input (the sampling budget), and Ŷik denotes the k-th can-
didate sample. In adaptive prediction-set construction (Romano et al., 2020; Angelopoulos et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2023), the conformity score for each sample is computed via a softmax function:

                                            exp(−ℓ(Xi , Ŷik ))
                                    ski = Pm                    j
                                                                  ,                                    (3)
                                           j=1 exp(−ℓ(Xi , Ŷi ))

where −ℓ denotes the negative log-likelihood loss. Next, the global conformity threshold τ is ob-
tained by computing the p-quantile over all candidate scores:
                                n                                         o
                        τ = Qp sji , , i = 1, . . . , n, ; j = 1, . . . , m ,                 (4)

                                              ⌈(n + 1)(1 − α)⌉
                                        p=                     ,                                       (5)
                                                     n
and α ∈ (0, 1) is the user-specified miscoverage rate. To satisfy conditional coverage, The predic-
tion set for input Xi is then defined as
                                         n                                o
                             Cα (Xi ) = Ŷik , , ski ≥ τ, k = 1, . . . , m .                    (6)

which ensures that the resulting set includes the ground truth with probability at least 1 − α. Al-
though conformal prediction in the classical setting can provide guaranteed conditional coverage, the
conformal scores assigned to candidate outputs are typically required to be normalized, as shown in
Eq. 3, and this normalization inherently introduces a bottleneck to parallelization. Therefore, in the
subsequent Ordinal Classification, we transform the problem into a hypothesis testing framework via
p-values to avoid normalization, with a proof of its coverage guarantee provided in Appendix A.8.

Problem Setup. In the asynchronous test-time scaling setup, we leverage a draft model for
fast sampling and delegate verification to a slower target model. Unlike classical rejection sam-
pling (Chen et al., 2023), which approximates a target distribution with a draft distribution, we focus
on accurately predicting the rejection rate, thereby reducing VRAM out-of-memory risk and the
synchronization overhead caused by global ranking or softmax function. Given a predefined α, we
estimate a confidence level such that the ground truth y falls within the prediction set Cα (Y ) with
probability at least 1 − α:
                                      P(y ∈ Cα (Y )) ≥ 1 − α,                                       (7)
where α is conventionally interpreted as the significance level (e.g., 0.05 corresponding to 95%
confidence). In this work, however, we reinterpret α as the rejection rate of the target model.

                                                       3
