                                        N EURAL P HRASE - TO -P HRASE M ACHINE T RANSLATION
                                         Jiangtao Feng∗                                        Lingpeng Kong, Po-Sen Huang
                                         Fudan University                                               DeepMind
                                         fengjt16@fudan.edu.cn                                 {lingpenk, posenhuang}@google.com

                                         Chong Wang, Da Huang                                           Jiayuan Mao∗
                                                Google                                                  Tsinghua University
                                         {chongw, dahua}@google.com                                     mjy14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn




arXiv:1811.02172v1 [cs.CL] 6 Nov 2018
                                         Kan Qiao, Dengyong Zhou
                                                 Google
                                         {qiaokan, dennyzhou}@google.com



                                                                                        A BSTRACT
                                                     In this paper, we propose Neural Phrase-to-Phrase Machine Translation (NP2 MT).
                                                     Our model uses a phrase attention mechanism to discover relevant input (source)
                                                     segments that are used by a decoder to generate output (target) phrases. We
                                                     also design an efficient dynamic programming algorithm to decode segments that
                                                     allows the model to be trained faster than the existing neural phrase-based machine
                                                     translation method by Huang et al. (2018). Furthermore, our method can naturally
                                                     integrate with external phrase dictionaries during decoding. Empirical experiments
                                                     show that our method achieves comparable performance with the state-of-the art
                                                     methods on benchmark datasets. However, when the training and testing data are
                                                     from different distributions or domains, our method performs better.


                                        1       I NTRODUCTION
                                        Statistical phrase-based models used to be the state-of-the-art machine translation systems (Koehn
                                        et al., 2007) before the deep learning revolution. In contrast to word-based systems (Koehn et al.,
                                        2003; Lopez, 2008; Koehn, 2009), phrase-based approaches explicitly model phrase structures in
                                        both source and target sentences and their corresponding alignments. These linguistic structures can
                                        be understood as a form of inductive bias to the model, a key factor to its superior performance over
                                        word-based counterpart.
                                        In recent years, we have witnessed the surge of neural sequence to sequence (seq2seq) models (Bah-
                                        danau et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014). These models usually consist of three main components:
                                        an encoder that encodes the source sentence into a fixed-length vectoR, a decoder that generates
                                        the translation word by word, and an attention module that selectively retrieves the source side
                                        information as per the decoder’s needs. Innovations in both architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017;
                                        Gehring et al., 2017) and training techniques (Vaswani et al., 2017; Ba et al., 2016) keep advancing
                                        the-state-the-art results on standard benchmarks for machine translation.
                                        Despite the remarkable success of neural sequence to sequence models, the biases induced from phrase
                                        structures, which have been shown to be useful in machine translation (Koehn, 2009), are largely
                                        ignored. Until recently, Huang et al. (2018) developed Neural Phrase-based Machine Translation
                                        (NPMT) to incorporate target-side phrasal information into a neural translation model. Their model
                                        builds upon the Sleep-WAke Networks (SWAN), a segmentation-based sequence modeling technique
                                        described in Wang et al. (2017a).
                                        In this paper, we propose Neural Phrase-to-Phrase Machine Translation (NP2 MT). Our contributions
                                        are twofold. First, we develop an explicit phrase-level attention mechanism to capture the source
                                        side phrasal information and their alignments with the target side phrase outputs. This approach also
                                            ∗
                                                This work was done when Jiangtao and Jiayuan interned in Google.


                                                                                               1
                                                                            y1    y2        $         y3    y4   $



                               ...             ...                                                                         segment decoder
 phrase-level encoder

                                                                            <p>   y1        y2        <p>   y3   y4


sentence-level encoder                                                                                                      target encoder



                          x1      x2      x3         x4         x5          <s>        y1        y2         y3        y4


Figure 1: The architecture of NP2 MT model. The example shows how the target phrase y3:4 is
translated conditioning directly on the source phrase x2:3 , using the phrase-level attention. Note
that for brevity, in the phrase-level encoder, we only show one possible segmentation of the source
sentence. We use “· · · ” to indicate all the possible segments xi:j in Eq. 2.


avoids the more costly dynamic programming procedure due to the monotonic requirement for input-
output alignments in NPMT. NP2 MT can achieve comparable performance with the state-of-the art
methods on benchmark datasets. Second, we can naturally incorporate an external phrase-to-phrase
dictionary during the decoding procedure. NMT systems trained on a fixed amount of parallel data
are known to have limitations with out-of-vocabulary words (Luong et al., 2014). In other words,
those out-of-vocabulary words are from different data distributions other than the training data. The
standard remedy for this is to apply a post-processing step that patches in unknown words based
on the word-level alignment information from attention mechanism (Luong et al., 2014; Hashimoto
et al., 2016). In our model, given the phrase-level attentions, we develop a dictionary look-up
decoding method with an external phrase-to-phrase dictionary. We demonstrate that our NP2 MT
model consistently outperforms Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) in a simulated open vocabulary
setting and a cross domain translation setting.

2     N EURAL PHRASE - TO - PHRASE MACHINE TRANSLATION

In this section, we first describe the proposed NP2 MT model with the phrase-level attention mecha-
nism. We show how it avoids the more costly dynamic programming used in NPMT (Huang et al.,
2018). Next, given the phrase-level attention mechanism, we develop a decoding algorithm that can
naturally use an external phrase-to-phrase dictionary.

2.1     NP2 MT

Figure 1 shows an overview of NP2 MT. There are three main components in our model: a source
encoder f src , a target encoder f tgt , and a segment decoder g. The source encoder f src consists
                                                    src    src
of a sentence-level and phrase-level encoders (fsent    , fphrase ), namely f src = fphrase
                                                                                     src       src
                                                                                            ◦ fsent . We use
bidirectional LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) for source encoders, LSTM for target encoder
and the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) for the segment decoder.1
Consider a source sentence x1:T = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } and a target sentence y1:T 0 = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yT 0 }.
                                                                                   src
First, the source sentence x1:T is passed through sentence-level encoder fsent          to obtain the word
vector representation,
                                                                  src
                                                          s1:T = fsent (x1:T ).                                                        (1)
                                     phrase
Second, we use phrase-level encoder fsrc    to independently encode all possible segments xi:j in the
source sentence as,
                                   src
                         h[i,j] = fphrase (si:j ), ∀(i, j) ∈ {(i, j) : 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ i + L − 1 ≤ T }.                                    (2)
    1
      In our proposed model, we first tried LSTM to use as the targer decoder, but we later found Transformer did
better to capture meaningful output segments.


                                                                     2
where L is the maximum segment length we will consider in our model. This architecture of
computing phrase embedding is inspired by the Segmental RNNs (Kong et al., 2015), which has been
shown to be effective in both text and speech tasks (Lu et al., 2017).
Denote h as the entire set of phrase-level encoding vectors. Now the rest of the model is more
conveniently described as a generative process. Let π(·) be a concatenation operator, $ be the end of
segment symbol and eos as the end of sentence symbol.
      1. For segment index n = 1, ..., ∞
          (a) Update the attention state given all previous segments,
                                                aj = attn(h, π(z1:n−1 )),                        (3)
                         Pn−1
              where j = m=1 |zm | is the total length of all previous segments. Note that different
              collections of previous segments can lead to the same attention state as long as their
              concatenation is the same.
          (b) Given the current state aj , sample words from segment decoder g until we reach the
              end of segment symbol $ or end of sentence eos. This gives us a segment zn .
          (c) If we see eos in zn , stop.
      2. Concatenate {z1 , . . . , zN } to obtain the output sentence π(z1:N ) = y1:T 0 .
Since there are more than one way to obtain the same y1:T 0 using the generative process above, we
need to consider all cases. Let z be a valid segmentation of y1:T 0 , then we have
                                                                        |z|
                                                             X          Y
                                  p(y1:T 0 |x1:T ) =                           p(zn |aj ),                          (4)
                                                        z:π(z)=y1:T 0 n=1

where |z| is the number of segment in z, attention aj (z1:n−1 , h) is defined in Eq. 3 and the segment
probability p(zn |aj ) is defined via the decoder g.

2.2   T RAINING

Given a pair of source and target sentence (x1:T , y1:T 0 ), the objective function of machine translation
model is defined as follows,
                                     L(θ) = − log p(y1:T 0 |x1:T ).                                    (5)
Similar to NPMT in Huang et al. (2018), direct computing Eq. (5) is intractable. We also need to
develop a dynamic programming algorithms to efficiently compute the loss function. We denote
conditional probability p(y1:j |x1:T ) as α(j); then we have p(y1:T 0 |x1:T ) = α(T 0 ). It can be shown
that we have the following recursion,
                                  X
                         α(j) =        α(j 0 )p(yj 0 +1:j |aj 0 ),
                                       j 0 <j
                                                                               Y
                p(yj 0 +1:j |aj 0 ) = p($|yj 0 +1:j , aj 0 )p(yj 0 |aj 0 )              p(yk |yj 0 :k−1 , aj 0 ),
                                                                             j 0 <k≤j
The initial condition is α(0) = 1. The computational complexity of this algorithm is to O(T 0 L),
where L denotes the maximum segment length. Comparing with the original NPMT model (Huang
et al., 2018) with O(T T 0 L) training complexity, the proposed approach is much faster.

2.3   D ECODING

For the proposed NP2 MT, besides the standard beam search algorithm, we propose a method to
decode with an external phrase-to-phrase dictionary. We leave the beam search algorithm in Appendix.

Dictionary integration in decoding. The proposed NP2 MT builds a phrase-to-phrase framework,
which could be easily extended to leverage an external phrase-to-phrase dictionary. Here, we describe
the dictionary-enhanced decoding algorithm in the greedy search case.2
    2
      Integration dictionary to beam search is nontrivial. For the current model, the usage of the dictionary is
determined by rules instead of probability scores. But beam search requires a quantitative comparison among
the candidates consisting of the phrases generated by both of the rule-based system and the neural model. It is
unclear how to quantify the former into beam search scores. We leave it for future work.


                                                             3
