                                         S ENTENCE E NCODING WITH T REE - CONSTRAINED R E -
                                         LATION N ETWORKS

                                          Lei Yu Cyprien de Masson d’Autume Chris Dyer
                                          Phil Blunsom Lingpeng Kong Wang Ling
                                          DeepMind
                                          {leiyu, cyprien, cdyer, pblunsom, lingpenk, lingwang}@google.com




arXiv:1811.10475v1 [cs.CL] 26 Nov 2018
                                                                                     A BSTRACT

                                                  The meaning of a sentence is a function of the relations that hold between its
                                                  words. We instantiate this relational view of semantics in a series of neural models
                                                  based on variants of relation networks (RNs) which represent a set of objects (for
                                                  us, words forming a sentence) in terms of representations of pairs of objects. We
                                                  propose two extensions to the basic RN model for natural language. First, building
                                                  on the intuition that not all word pairs are equally informative about the meaning
                                                  of a sentence, we use constraints based on both supervised and unsupervised
                                                  dependency syntax to control which relations influence the representation. Second,
                                                  since higher-order relations are poorly captured by a sum of pairwise relations,
                                                  we use a recurrent extension of RNs to propagate information so as to form
                                                  representations of higher order relations. Experiments on sentence classification,
                                                  sentence pair classification, and machine translation reveal that, while basic RNs
                                                  are only modestly effective for sentence representation, recurrent RNs with latent
                                                  syntax are a reliably powerful representational device.


                                         1   I NTRODUCTION
                                         Sentence representations play a crucial role in many NLP tasks, including sentiment analysis,
                                         paraphrase detection, entailment recognition, summarisation, and machine translation. Popular
                                         approaches for encoding sentences compose words using recurrent units (Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever
                                         et al., 2014) or convolutions (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014; Kim, 2014). A series of papers has also
                                         explored improving sentence representations by incorporating structural information into the encoders,
                                         including both supervised syntactic information (Tai et al., 2015; Bowman et al., 2016; Ma et al.,
                                         2015; Socher et al., 2013), and unsupervised syntax where the structure is learned to maximise task
                                         performance (Yogatama et al., 2017; Choi et al., 2017).
                                         We approach the problem of sentence representation starting from the insight that the meaning
                                         of a sentence is an aggregation of the set of relations that hold between words. For example, in
                                         the simple sentence “John saw Mary”, most of the semantics is captured by knowing that “John
                                         is doing seeing” and that “Mary is what is being seen”. Treating sentences as a conjunction of
                                         simple relational predicates has been influential in both formal semantics (Copestake et al., 2005)
                                         and roll-filler computational models of semantics (Smolensky, 1990). While the prior sentence
                                         representation architectures discussed above can implicitly discover and represent such relational
                                         facts, the recently proposed relation networks model (Santoro et al., 2017, RNs) lets us work with
                                         them more directly.
                                         RNs represent a set of objects by aggregating representations of pairwise relations of all pairs of
                                         objects. For sentence representation, the “set” we seek to represent is a sentence, and the objects are
                                         words. There are two problems with this setup, and we develop extensions of RNs to address these
                                         shortcomings (§3). First, RNs assume equal contributions from all pairs of objects. In unstructured
                                         sets, this uniformity is justified, but sentences are structured sequences, not unstructured sets, and
                                         intuitively the relationship between some word pairs is more meaningful than the relationship between
                                         others. To address this structural deficiency, we extend RNs to be sensitive to pairwise attachment
                                         information based on a dependency tree structure. Our formulation lets us either use dependency trees
                                         obtained from external parsers, or learn trees as latent variables so as to optimise task performance.


                                                                                           1
Tree learning is tractable in this model because we exploit the fact that RNs operate on representations
of pairs of words, and we can efficiently obtain marginal probabilities of attachment decisions (i.e.,
word pairs) in pair-factored parsing models using Kirchoff’s matrix tree theorem (Tutte, 1984; Koo
et al., 2007; Liu & Lapata, 2017). A second objection to RNs is that they aggregate representations
of pairs, but the meaning of a sentence may require understanding higher-order relational information
(i.e., trees can be deeply nested). To enable representations that can directly capture the salient
aspects of higher-order relations, we use recurrent RNs (Palm et al., 2017), but again augmented with
supervised or latent dependency trees.
We carefully evaluate and analyse different versions of our RN-based models on machine translation
and three text classification tasks, namely textual entailment, question type classification, and
duplicate question detection (§4). Our experimental results demonstrate that in general sentence
encoders based on recurrent RNs outperform those based on vanilla RNs, and models with latent
tree constraints mostly achieve better performance than their supervised counter-parts. Overall,
our models outperform sentence encoders based on birectional LSTMs and those incorporating an
intra-sentence attention mechanism.

2    BACKGROUND
Relations networks (Santoro et al., 2017) are designed to model relational reasoning. Neural networks
augmented with RNs have achieved success across various tasks such as visual question answering and
text-based question answering on the bAbI suite of tasks, on which even models with sophisticated
architecture could not obtain satisfactory results due to the requirement for complex relational
inference. An RN is formalised as
                                                                  
                                                   X
                                  RN(O) = fφ         gθ (oi , oj ) ,                            (1)
                                                     i,j

where the input is a set of “objects” O = {o1 , o2 , . . . , on }, oi ∈ Rd , and f and g are functions
parameterised by φ and θ using feed-forward neural networks (MLPs). The function gθ computes the
relatedness of two objects oi and oj . RNs aggregate the relations between all the pairs of objects via
the summation operation in Eq. 1. The embeddings of objects oi and oj differ depending on the task
and the nature of the objects to be compared.
Although RNs perform well on problems that require basic relational reasoning, they are sub-optimal
for tasks that demand multiple steps of reasoning as only pair-wise relational operations are involved.
To address this limitation, Palm et al. (2017) proposed a recurrent variant for RNs, denoted as
recurrent RNs, and demonstrated the model’s ability for multi-step reasoning, which is essential for
the tasks they studied, namely Sudoku and question answering. Recurrent RNs are formulated as
follows:
                              X
                        mti =     gθ (ht−1    t−1
                                                  ), hti = fφ ht−1  , oi , mti .
                                                                              
                                        j , hi                  i                                   (2)
                                 j

At timestep t, hti is the hidden state vector corresponding to the i-th object. In addition to the previous
hidden state ht−1
               i     and the input oi , it also takes into account the message mti , which summarises
relations between the i-th object and all its neighbours (e.g. all objects in the simplest form) in the
previous timestep t − 1. The number of recurrent steps is a hyperparameter, where higher values
allow the modelling of longer chains of relations. In the standard setting, the vector oi encodes
timestep invariant information, such as position and ordering, and gθ and fφ are parameterised as
MLPs and LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), respectively. In this architecture, the recurrent
dependencies accumulate information of relations enabling multi-step reasoning.

3    M ODELS
A straightforward application of RNs for sentence representation is to treat words as objects and
consider all relations between pairs of words in a sentence following Eq. 1. Intuitively, this approach
is unappealing as not all direct links between pairs of words are equally important. Thus, we propose
to use a dependency grammar as a constraint in RNs and argue that the relations considered in


                                                    2
the model should comply with a valid dependency tree structure. In the vanilla RNs, this means
that the aggregations will operate on the subset of relations that form a valid tree (§3.1) and in the
recurrent RNs, we want the messages (Eq. 2) only coming from the syntactical neighbours of the
node corresponding to a consistent tree structure across different timesteps (§3.2). In a supervised
setting we use an off the shelf parser to generate trees for all sentences. In an unsupervised setting,
we model them as latent variables.

3.1   RN S WITH TREE CONSTRAINTS

Let x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] denote a sentence, where xi represents the i-th word in the sentence. Let
y ∗ denote a directed dependency tree, which is represented by a set of head-modifier index tuples
(h, m).1 To incorporate syntactic information, we modify Eq. 1 by restricting the summation function
to span over (h, m) ∈ y ∗ :
                                                                     
                                                   X
                                       s = fφ           gθ (oh , om ) ,                             (3)
                                               (h,m)∈y ∗

where s denotes the vector representation of the sentence x, and oh and om are embeddings corre-
sponding to the head word xh and the modifier word xm , respectively.
To enable task-optimal trees to be learned we introduce a distribution over trees given the sentence,
pψ (y | x), and rewrite Eq. 3 in terms of expectations under this distribution:
                                                                         
                                     X                 X
                         s = fφ           pψ (y | x)        gθ (oh , om ) ,
                                      y∈Y(x)               (h,m)∈y


where Y(x) denotes the set of dependency trees for a sentence x. Because the inner loop depends
only on (h, m) pairs and the linearity of
                                       Pexpectation, we can rewrite this in terms of the marginal
edge probabilities pψ (h → m | x) = y∈Y(x) pψ (y | x)[(h, m) ∈ y], where [q] = 1 if q is true
and 0 otherwise. This becomes
                                                                    
                                       X
                         s = fφ          pψ (h → m | x)gθ (oh , om ) ,
                                       (h,m)∈D(x)


where D(x) denote all possible dependencies arcs for a sentence x: D(x) = {(h, m) | h ∈
[0 . . . n], m ∈ [1 . . . n]}.
Fortunately, the required attachment marginals can be calculated efficiently in O(n3 ) using Kirch-
hoff’s matrix-tree theorem (Tutte, 1984), provided the conditional tree probability is a conditional
random field with potentials that only look at a single pair of nodes at a time (Koo et al., 2007;
Smith & Smith, 2007; Liu & Lapata, 2017). Although this restriction on the potential functions
may seem limiting (the model cannot look at higher order dependency structures when assigning
probability to the tree), representations derived from neural networks employing such models can
produce state-of-the-art supervised dependency parsers (Dozat & Manning, 2017), suggesting this is
an acceptable restriction.
For our model, we define the potential associated with an edge using a bilinear form (Ma & Hovy,
2017),
                                                  T          T       T
                                  Ψ(h, m) = eoh Wom +U oh +V om +b ,                                        (4)

where oi denotes the BiLSTM output corresponding to the input word xi ; W, U, V are weight
matrices, and b is the bias term.
    1
      For the experiments below that use syntax trees, we obtain dependency parses from SyntexNet (Weiss et al.,
2015; Kong et al., 2017), an open-source parser trained on the Universal Dependencies English dataset (Nivre
et al., 2016).


                                                       3
