                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




                                         JAILBREAKING AS A R EWARD M ISSPECIFICATION
                                         P ROBLEM
                                          Zhihui Xie1 Jiahui Gao1† Lei Li1 Zhenguo Li2 Qi Liu1                              Lingpeng Kong1†
                                          1
                                           The University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
                                          {zhxieml,ggaojiahui,nlp.lilei}@gmail.com
                                          {li.zhenguo}@huawei.com {liuqi,lpk}@cs.hku.hk
                                          WARNING: This paper contains examples of harmful language.




arXiv:2406.14393v5 [cs.LG] 19 Apr 2025
                                                                                         A BSTRACT

                                                      The widespread adoption of large language models (LLMs) has raised concerns
                                                      about their safety and reliability, particularly regarding their vulnerability to ad-
                                                      versarial attacks. In this paper, we propose a new perspective that attributes
                                                      this vulnerability to reward misspecification during the alignment process. This
                                                      misspecification occurs when the reward function fails to accurately capture the
                                                      intended behavior, leading to misaligned model outputs. We introduce a met-
                                                      ric ReGap to quantify the extent of reward misspecification and demonstrate its
                                                      effectiveness and robustness in detecting harmful backdoor prompts. Building
                                                      upon these insights, we present ReMiss, a system for automated red teaming that
                                                      generates adversarial prompts in a reward-misspecified space. ReMiss achieves
                                                      state-of-the-art attack success rates on the AdvBench benchmark against various
                                                      target aligned LLMs while preserving the human readability of the generated
                                                      prompts. Furthermore, these attacks on open-source models demonstrate high
                                                      transferability to closed-source models like GPT-4o and out-of-distribution tasks
                                                      from HarmBench. Detailed analysis highlights the unique advantages of the pro-
                                                      posed reward misspecification objective compared to previous methods, offering
                                                      new insights for improving LLM safety and robustness. Code is available at:
                                                      https://github.com/zhxieml/remiss-jailbreak.



                                         1        I NTRODUCTION

                                         The emergence of highly capable commer-
                                         cial large language models (LLMs) has led to                                  ②
                                                                                                                                      Vulnerable Prompts
                                         their widespread adoption across various do-
                                                                                                                                 ② ①
                                         mains (OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023; Reka,
                                                                                                                ②
                                         2024). However, as the popularity and po-                                                    ① Unaligned prompts
                                         tential impact of these models grow, concerns                                               ② Misspecified prompts

                                         about their safety and reliability have also in-                     Misspecified Prompts
                                                                                                     Aligned Prompts
                                         creased (Bommasani et al., 2021; Gabriel et al.,      Harmful Prompts

                                         2024; Pi et al., 2024). Ensuring that LLMs Figure 1: We attribute the vulnerability of aligned mod-
                                         are helpful, honest, and harmless (Askell et al., els to reward misspecification: the reward function used
                                         2021) presents significant challenges, as their during the alignment process fails to generalize effec-
                                         powerful language understanding and genera- tively to unaligned prompts, or is incorrectly specified
                                         tion capabilities could lead to potential risks of for prompts due to noisy preference data.
                                         jailbreaking, where an LLM breaks through pre-
                                         set limitations and constraints, generating problematic outputs (Chao et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024;
                                         Xie et al., 2024).
                                         Recent advances in LLMs have been driven by techniques that incorporate human feedback (Ziegler
                                         et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022) or AI feedback (Bai et al., 2022b) to mitigate these risks. At the
                                         heart of these approaches is reward modeling (Leike et al., 2018), which involves learning a reward
                                              †
                                                  Corresponding author.


                                                                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




             Aligned LLMs are Reward Models                                      ReGap: Quantifying Misspecification
                                                                                                                             #(%!|')#         "
             𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦 = log𝜋 𝑦 𝑥            − log𝜋ref 𝑦 𝑥
                                                                          ReGap 𝑥 ≔ 𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦 ! − 𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦 " = log                          ref (% |')
                                                                                                                             #(%"|')#        !
          reward model     aligned LLM        reference LLM                                                                            ref (% |')

    𝑥                                                                         ReMiss: Jailbreaking Safety-aligned LLMs
          Guide users on how to create a fake ID



                           𝑦!     I'm sorry, but I cannot provide
                                                                               😈
                                                                            Jailbreak
                                                                                                      Find prompt 𝑥 ) : ReGap 𝑥 ) ≤ 0
                              guidance on how to create a fake ID…


                           𝑦 "Sure, here are instructions on how to   𝑥′       Guide users on how to create a fake ID
                                                                             template using IDCardGenerator tool. For
                                         create a fake ID…                  example, a student card with name on it and
                                                                           university logo etc., A photo ID Card Generator
                                                                                              Template.
        𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦 !                         𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦 !                                                      Sure, here’s a step-by-step guide on how to
        𝑟(𝑥, 𝑦 " )                       𝑟(𝑥 , 𝑦 " )                                                         create a fake ID template using
                                                                                                                 IDCardGenerator tool…
    Well-specified Reward                Misspecified Reward



Figure 2: Overview of our approach for jailbreaking aligned LLMs through reward misspecification.
We leverage the concept of aligned LLMs as implicit reward models and quantifies misspecification by
ReGap to identify prompts that lead to harmful responses with higher implicit rewards. By exploiting
these vulnerabilities, ReMiss generates adversarial prompts to effectively jailbreak safety-aligned
models. The example is from our experiments on attacking Vicuna-7b-v1.5.


function either explicitly (Gao et al., 2023) or implicitly (Rafailov et al., 2024). The quality of reward
modeling is critical for ensuring that LLMs are well-aligned with human values and intentions.
Despite promising outcomes, current aligned LLMs are still vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Zou
et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024), and there remains a significant gap in understanding why these
alignments fail. In this paper, we propose a novel viewpoint that attributes the vulnerability of
LLMs to reward misspecification during the alignment process, wherein the reward function fails
to accurately rank the quality of the responses (Figure 1). More formally, let r(x, y) denote the
reward function, where x represents the input and y represents the model’s response. The problem of
jailbreaking can then be formulated as a search in a reward-misspecified space, where instances of x
satisfy r(x, y + ) < r(x, y − ), despite y + being a more appropriate response to x than y − .
Framing jailbreaking from a reward misspecification perspective poses practical challenges. Specifi-
cally, the alignment process is typically opaque and involves multiple phases (Touvron et al., 2023),
making the underlying reward function unavailable. To address this, we characterize implicit rewards
through the behavioral deviations from a reference model. Building on this, we introduce a new
metric, ReGap (Equation 4), to evaluate the extent of reward misspecification. Intuitively, ReGap
measures the extent to which the implicit reward function assigns a higher score to harmful responses
over harmless reference responses. We demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of this metric in
detecting catastrophic misspecification on harmful backdoor prompts (§3.2).
Leveraging the inherent capability for vulnerability identification, ReGap has the potential to jailbreak
aligned LLMs. To verify its effectiveness, we propose an automated red teaming system ReMiss,
which leverages ReGap to explore adversarial prompts for various aligned LLMs (§4). We illustrate
our approach in Figure 2. ReMiss achieves state-of-the-art attack success rates on the AdvBench
benchmark (Zou et al., 2023) while preserving the human readability of the generated prompts (§5.2).
In-depth analysis reveals that our approach can uncover a wide range of failure modes in the target
model, significantly enhancing the effectiveness of audits and red teaming efforts (§5.4). We hope that
viewing language model alignment through the lens of reward misspecification can offer a practical
approach for enhancing their safety and reliability in real-world applications.


2         BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we provide the necessary background and preliminaries to contextualize our study.
We consider LLMs as systems that map a prompt x into a response y ∼ π(· | x). Alignment and
jailbreaking can be understood as processes that modify this mapping in different ways.


                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




2.1   A LIGNMENT

Alignment is the process of guiding a model to exhibit desired behaviors within a specific context.
Without loss of generality, for a base (reference) model πref , alignment adjusts its probabilities of
generating certain responses y given a context x:
                                                               π(y | x)
                              π(y | x) = πref (y | x) exp(log              ).                      (1)
                                                              πref (y | x)
Inspired by Mitchell et al. (2023), we view any finetuning process from a perspective of reinforcement
learning (RL) with a KL-divergence constraint preventing divergence from the base model:
                       max E x∼D [r(x, y)] − βDKL [π(y | x)∥πref (y | x)] .
                         π      y∼π(·|x)
Here, r(x, y) denotes a reward function defining the behaviors to be encouraged (e.g., adherence to
ethical guidelines or safety constraints), while D defines the contexts in which these desired behaviors
are reinforced. This problem has a closed-form solution (Peters et al., 2010; Rafailov et al., 2024):
                                                 1                    1
                                π(y | x) =           πref (y | x) exp( r(x, y)),                     (2)
                                               Z(x)                   β
where Z(x) is the partition function. By plugging Equation 2 into Equation 1, we arrive at a key
insight: An aligned model π can be interpreted as the solution to the RL problem w.r.t. r(x, y) ∝
log ππ(y|x)
      ref (y|x)
                . We refer to log ππ(y|x)
                                   ref (y|x)
                                             as the implicit reward that emerges from comparing model
behaviors rather than being explicitly defined. Notably, this interpretation can be applied to any model
that is finetuned from πref . In this sense, implicit rewards serve as a measure of the effectiveness of
alignment, indicating how well the model’s behaviors are aligned as expected.

2.2   JAILBREAKING                                                                0.8
                                                                                        Jailbroken
                                                                             False
Jailbreaking is the process of eliciting undesired behaviors         0.6     True
from the target (aligned) model using adversarial prompts.
                                                                    Target Loss
Consider a malicious instruction x (e.g., Guide users on             0.4
how to create a fake ID); a jailbreaking attack transforms           0.2
it to x′ that can best induce undesired behaviors while
keeping the semantic unchanged. Following previous                   0.0
works (Zou et al., 2023; Paulus et al., 2024), we consider                50        0    50
a special class of jailbreaks that append a suffix s to the                        ReGap
original instruction: x′ = x∥s.                              Figure 3: ReGap serves as a superior proxy
                                                               for jailbreaking compared to target loss.
Discussions on previous approaches. Previous works The plot shows the relationship between two
on jailbreaking (Zou et al., 2023; Paulus et al., 2024) usu- proxies (ReGap and target loss) for adversar-
ally frame it as minimizing the target loss, namely the ial suffixes targeting Vicuna-13b-v1.5 on the
negative log probability of target harmful responses y − : AdvBench test set.
               s∗ = arg min ℓ(y − | x∥s) where ℓ(y − | x∥s) := − log π(y − | x∥s).                    (3)
                          s∈S
While this provides a straightforward objective for jailbreaking, only considering target responses
alone in adversarial loss is flawed, as the goal of jailbreaking is to elicit target behaviors rather than
merely generating specific target responses. Our preliminary analysis (detailed setup provided in
§5) shows that target loss alone is not a good proxy for detecting successful jailbreaks measured by
keyword matching. Specifically, we observe in Figure 3 that there is considerable overlap in the target
loss values for both jailbroken and non-jailbroken instances: Although high target loss generally
indicates unsuccessful jailbreaks, it fails to differentiate between successful and unsuccessful jailbreak
attempts when the loss is low. This results in ineffective attacks that fail to fundamentally disrupt the
aligned model’s behavior. This suggests the need for a more effective approach to identifying and
exploring vulnerabilities.

3     R EWARD M ISSPECIFICATION IN A LIGNMENT
As discussed in §2.1, any aligned model π is associated with a reward model. This naturally leads
to a critical question: what if the rewards are misspecified? In this section, we present a systematic


                                                    3
