                                                      SyntaxNet Models for the CoNLL 2017 Shared Task
                                                       Chris Alberti, Daniel Andor, Ivan Bogatyy, Michael Collins, Dan Gillick,
                                                           Lingpeng Kong∗, Terry Koo, Ji Ma, Mark Omernick, Slav Petrov,
                                                                     Chayut Thanapirom, Zora Tung, David Weiss




arXiv:1703.04929v1 [cs.CL] 15 Mar 2017
                                                                                               Google Inc
                                                                                              New York, NY



                                                                                                   Abstract
                                                  We describe a baseline dependency parsing system for the CoNLL2017 Shared Task. This system,
                                               which we call “ParseySaurus,” uses the DRAGNN framework [Kong et al., 2017] to combine transition-
                                               based recurrent parsing and tagging with character-based word representations. On the v1.3 Universal
                                               Dependencies Treebanks, the new system outpeforms the publicly available, state-of-the-art “Parsey’s
                                               Cousins” models by 3.47% absolute Labeled Accuracy Score (LAS) across 52 treebanks.


                                         1 Introduction
                                         Universal Dependencies1 are growing in popularity due to the cross-lingual consistency and large language
                                         coverage of the provided data. The initiative has been able to connect researchers across the globe and now
                                         includes 64 treebanks in 45 languages. It is therefore not surprising that the Conference on Computational
                                         Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) in 2017 will feature a shared task on “Multilingual Parsing from Raw
                                         Text to Universal Dependencies.”
                                             To facilitate further research on multilingual parsing and to enable even small teams to participate in the
                                         shared task, we are releasing baseline implementations corresponding to our best models. This short paper
                                         describes (1) the model structure employed in these models, (2) how the models were trained and (3) an em-
                                         pirical evaluation comparing these models to those in Andor et al. [2016]. Our model uses on the DRAGNN
                                         framework [Kong et al., 2017] to improve upon Andor et al. [2016] with dynamically constructed, recurrent
                                         transition-based models. The code as well as the pretrained models is available at the SyntaxNet github
                                         repository.2 .
                                             We note that this paper describes the parsing model used in the baseline. Further releases will describe
                                         any changes to the segmentation model compared to SyntaxNet.


                                         2 Character-based representation
                                         Recent work has shown that learned sub-word representations can improve over both static word embed-
                                         dings and manually extracted feature sets for describing word morphology. Jozefowicz et al. [2016] use a
                                         convolutional model over the characters in each word for language modeling. Similarly, Ling et al. [2015a,b]
                                         use a bidirectional LSTM over characters in each word for parsing and machine translation.
                                           ∗
                                             Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
                                           1
                                             http://universaldependencies.org/
                                           2
                                              https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/syntaxnet


                                                                                                           1
     Chung et al. [2016] take a more general approach. Instead of modeling each word explicitly, they allow
the model to learn a hierarchical “multi-timescale” representation of the input, where each layer corresponds
to a (learned) larger timescale.
     Our modeling approach is inspired by this multi-timescale architecture in that we generate our compu-
tation graph dynamically, but we define the timescales explicitly. The input layer operates on characters and
the subsequent layer operates on words, where the word representation is simply the hidden state computed
by the first layer at each word boundary. In principle, this structure permits fully dynamic word represen-
tations based on left context (unlike previous work) and simplifies recurrent computation at the word level
(unlike previous work with standard stacked LSTMs [Gillick et al., 2015]).
     More related work [Kim et al., 2015, Miyamoto and Cho, 2016, Lankinen et al., 2016, Ling et al., 2015a]
describes alternate neural network architectures for combining character- and word-level modeling for var-
ious tasks. Like Ballesteros et al. [2015], we use character-based LSTMs to improve the Stack-LSTM
Dyer et al. [2015] model for dependency parsing, but we share a single LSTM run over the entire sentence.


3 Model
Our model combines the recurrent multi-task parsing model of Kong et al. [2017] with character-based
representations learned by a LSTM. Given a tokenized text input, the model processes as follows:
    • A single LSTM processes the entire character string (including whitespace)3 left-to-right. The last
      hidden state in a given token (as given by the word boundaries) is used to represent that word in
      subsequent parts of the model.
    • A single LSTM processes the word representations (from the first step) in right-to-left order. We call
      this the “lookahead” model.
    • A single LSTM processes the lookahead representations right-to-left. This LSTM has a softmax layer
      which is trained to predict POS tags, and we refer to it as the “tagger” model.
    • The recurrent compositional parsing model [Kong et al., 2017] predicts parse tree left-to-right using
      the arc-standard transition system. Given a stack s and a input pointer to the buffer i, the parser
      dynamically links and concatenates the following input representations:
           – Recurrently, the two steps that last modified the so and s1 (either SHIFT or REDUCE opera-
             tions).
           – From the tagger layer, the hidden representations for s0 , s1 , and i.
           – From the lookahead layer, the hidden representation for i.
           – All are projected to 64 dimensions before concatenating.
           – The parser also extracts 12 discrete features for previously predicted parse labels, the same as in
             Kong et al. [2017].
       At inference time, we use beam decoding in the parser with a beam size of 8. We do not use local
       normalization, and instead train the models with “self-normalization” (see below).
     This model is implemented using the DRAGNN framework in TensorFlow. All code is publicly available
at the SyntaxNet repository. The code provides tools to visualize the unrolled structure of the graph at run-
time.
   3
     In our UD v1.3 experiments, the raw text string is not available. Since we use gold segmentations, the whitespace is artificially
induced, and functions as a “new word” signal for languages with no naturally occuring whitespace.




                                                                  2
3.1 Training
We train using the multi-task, maximum-likelihood “stack-propagation” method described in Kong et al.
[2017] and Zhang and Weiss [2016]. Specifically, we use the gold labels to alternate between two updates:

   1. TAGGER: We unroll the first three LSTMs and backpropagate gradients computed from the POS tags.

   2. PARSER: We unroll the entire model, and backpropagate gradients computed from the oracle parse
      sequence.

    We use the following schedule: pretrain TAGGER for 10,000 iterations. Then alternate TAGGER and
PARSER updates at a ratio of 1:8 until convergence.
    To optimize for beam decoding, we regularize the softmax objective to be “self-normalized.”Vaswani et al.
[2013], Andreas and Klein [2015]. With this modification to the softmax, the log scores of the model are
encouraged (but not constrained) to sum to one. We find that this helps mitigate some of the bias induced
by local normalization Andor et al. [2016], while being fast and efficient to train.

3.2 Hyperparameters
Like the ratio above, many hyperparameters, including design decisions, were tuned to find reasonable
values before training all 64 baseline models. While the full recipe can be deciphered from the code, here
are some key points for practitioners:

   • We use Layer Normalization [Ba et al., 2016] in all of our networks, both LSTM and the recurrent
     parser’s Relu network cell.

   • We always project the LSTM hidden representations down from 256→64 when we pass from one
     component to another.

   • We use moving averages of parameters at inference time.

   • We use the following ADAM recipe: β1 = β2 = 0.9, and set ǫ to be one of 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5
     (typically 10−4 ).

   • We normalize all gradients to have unit norm before applying the ADAM updates.

   • We use dropout both recurrently and on the inputs, at the same rate (typically 0.7 or 0.8).

   • We use a minibatch size of 4, with 4 asynchronous training threads doing asynchronous SGD.


4 Comparison to Parsey’s Cousins
Since the test set is not available for the contest, we use v1.3 of the Universal Dependencies treebanks to
compare to prior state-of-the-art on 52 languages. Our results are in Table 1. We observe that the new model
outperforms the original SyntaxNet baselines, sometimes quite dramatically (e.g. on Latvian, by close to
12% absolute LAS.) We note that this is not an exhaustive experiment, and further study is warranted in the
future. Nonethelss, these results show that the new baselines compare very favorably to at least one publicly
available state-of-the-art baseline.




                                                     3
