                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




                                         M O S: U NLEASHING PARAMETER E FFICIENCY OF
                                         L OW-R ANK A DAPTATION WITH M IXTURE OF S HARDS
                                          Sheng Wang∗ , Liheng Chen∗ , Pengan Chen                        Jingwei Dong
                                          School of Computing and Data Science                            School of Electrical Engineering
                                          The University of Hong Kong                                     Xi’an Jiaotong University
                                          {u3009618, clh648, cpa2001}@connect.hku.hk                      dongjingwei@stu.xjtu.edu.cn


                                          Boyang Xue, Jiyue Jiang
                                          Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management




arXiv:2410.00938v2 [cs.LG] 15 Feb 2025
                                          The Chinese University of Hong Kong
                                          byxue@se.cuhk.edu.hk, jiangjy@link.cuhk.edu.hk


                                          Lingpeng Kong, Chuan Wu
                                          School of Computing and Data Science
                                          The University of Hong Kong
                                          {lpk, cwu}@cs.hku.hk



                                                                                      A BSTRACT
                                                    The rapid scaling of large language models necessitates more lightweight fine-
                                                    tuning methods to reduce the explosive GPU memory overhead when numerous
                                                    customized models are served simultaneously. Targeting more parameter-efficient
                                                    low-rank adaptation (LoRA), parameter sharing presents a promising solution.
                                                    Empirically, our research into high-level sharing principles highlights the indis-
                                                    pensable role of differentiation in reversing the detrimental effects of pure shar-
                                                    ing. Guided by this finding, we propose Mixture of Shards (M O S), incorporating
                                                    both inter-layer and intra-layer sharing schemes, and integrating four nearly cost-
                                                    free differentiation strategies, namely subset selection, pair dissociation, vector
                                                    sharding, and shard privatization. Briefly, it selects a designated number of shards
                                                    from global pools with a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)-like routing mechanism be-
                                                    fore sequentially concatenating them to low-rank matrices. Hence, it retains all
                                                    the advantages of LoRA while offering enhanced parameter efficiency, and effec-
                                                    tively circumvents the drawbacks of peer parameter-sharing methods. Our empir-
                                                    ical experiments demonstrate approximately 8× parameter savings in a standard
                                                    LoRA setting. The ablation study confirms the significance of each component.
                                                    Our insights into parameter sharing and M O S method may illuminate future de-
                                                    velopments of more parameter-efficient finetuning methods. The code is officially
                                                    available at https://github.com/Forence1999/MoS.


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION
                                         With the remarkable capabilities, large language models (LLMs) (Dubey et al., 2024; Team et al.,
                                         2023; Jiang et al., 2023) are adapted for various downstream applications (Shao et al., 2023; 2024).
                                         Among parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods (Houlsby et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022), low-
                                         rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) reparameterizes the weight updates with two trainable
                                         low-rank matrices, and has gained the most popularity with reduced resource consumption, compet-
                                         itive performance, low-cost task switching, etc. Nevertheless, with the continuous applicability of
                                         scaling law (Achiam et al., 2023), the size of LLMs increases rapidly for even better performance,
                                         intensifying the need for more lightweight finetuning methods. For instance, GPT4o allows cus-
                                         tomization to its vast user base1 , incurring intense challenges to serve numerous customized models
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal Contribution.
                                             1
                                                 https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o-fine-tuning/


                                                                                             1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




simultaneously. Assuming a scenario with a Llama2-70B-sized model and 10,000 active users, each
allocated a LoRA module with the rank of 16, only the parameters of LoRAs would occupy 3.36
TB of GPU memory, an onerous burden for service providers. This underscores the need for a more
lightweight solution than LoRA, while retaining its advantages.
As a promising solution, parameter sharing has been extensively explored (Kopiczko et al., 2023;
Renduchintala et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). Specifically, VeRA (Kopiczko et al., 2023) adopts
inter-layer sharing of frozen matrices with trainable vectors; however, it results in limited model
capacity and necessitates an excessively high rank. Subsequently, Tied LoRA (Renduchintala et al.,
2023) mitigates these constraints by permitting shared matrices to be trainable. Yet, its tying mecha-
nism restricts applicability to linear layers of different dimensions. More recently, PRoLoRA (Wang
et al., 2024b) showcases enhanced parameter efficiency by reusing submatrices within a single lin-
ear layer, thereby circumventing the above restrictions. However, its limited focus on intra-layer
sharing constrains efficiency potential, and promises a hybrid approach integrating both intra-layer
and inter-layer sharing. Besides, while these methods, with their intuitive designs, have shown the
benefits of parameter sharing on enhanced parameter efficiency, the fundamental principles have not
been discussed yet to guide the future development of parameter sharing strategies.
Targeting enhanced parameter efficiency, we first analyze the factors influencing parameter sharing
performance in the context of LoRA. Our empirical findings indicate that improving the parameter
efficiency of LoRA requires a careful balance between sharing and differentiation. While parame-
ter sharing can significantly decrease the number of trainable parameters, the negative effects (i.e.,
possible performance degradation) of excessive sharing necessitate differentiation strategies to mit-
igate these drawbacks. Guided by this insight, we propose a more parameter-efficient LoRA-based
method called Mixture of Shards (M O S). It features a global sharing scheme to achieve a higher
sharing ratio, along with four nearly cost-free differentiation techniques: subset selection, pair dis-
sociation, vector sharding, and shard privatization. Briefly, our method selects a designated number
of shards from global pools with a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)-like routing mechanism (Jacobs et al.,
1991), and sequentially concatenate them to construct the low-rank matrices.
Empirically, we validate its superior performance compared to peer methods in scenarios with
fixed trainable parameter count, and demonstrate an eightfold parameter reduction in performance-
targeted situations. A thorough ablation analysis of each differentiation strategy reveals that all
contribute to unleashing the parameter efficiency of M O S, despite their nearly cost-free property.
Notably, pair dissociation and shard privatization boost the efficiency more significantly through
increased combination diversity and exclusive differentiation, respectively, whereas vector sharding
provides only limited gains in diversity. With the intuitive design, our method retains all the ad-
vantages of LoRA while circumventing the drawbacks of peer methods. The markedly improved
parameter efficiency alleviates the burden on service providers when numerous LoRA-based cus-
tomized models are served simultaneously.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:

       • We introduce a more parameter-efficient finetuning method named Mixture of Shards
         (M O S), which facilitates the concurrent serving of numerous customized models with the
         saliently reduced GPU memory overhead.
       • Our exploration into high-level sharing principles highlights the balance between sharing
         and differentiation to enhance parameter efficiency, providing valuable insights for the fu-
         ture advancement of parameter-sharing methods.
       • Extensive experiments empirically confirm the significant parameter savings achieved by
         M O S, and validate the necessity and relative importance of each differentiation strategy.
       • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply MoE-like mechanism for parameter
         savings in a single-task LoRA. Besides, our dissociated perspective may also inspire further
         parameter reduction for LoRA-based multitasking scenarios.

2   S HARING & D IFFERENTIATION

Drawing inspiration from the inter-layer shared VeRA (Kopiczko et al., 2023) and intra-layer shared
PRoLoRA (Wang et al., 2024b), we seek to create a unified sharing mechanism that leverages both


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




           (a) LoRA                        (b) Pure Sharing          (c) Pure Sharing (Differentiated)
Figure 1: Illustration of vanilla LoRA, pure sharing, and differentiated pure sharing methods. The
rank of vanilla LoRA is denoted as r, while that of pure sharing is boosted to rL through the
aggregation of trainable parameters among L Transformer blocks. In Figure 1c, the colored squares
between the low-rank matrices A and B signify scalars and boolean values for random scaling and
subset selection strategies, respectively.


perspectives, promising further enhanced parameter efficiency. To guide this development more
clearly, we start with reparameterizing the vanilla LoRA, followed by analyzing the impact of high-
level factors (i.e., sharing and differentiation) on model performance under a specified number of
trainable parameters. All relevant approaches are illustrated in Figure 1 for an intuitive comparison.
Reparameterization of LoRA. LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) efficiently adapts LLMs by updating the
frozen pretrained weights with low-rank decomposition. Specifically, given a pretrained weight
W0 ∈ Ro×h , its weight update ∆W is approximated as the product of two trainable matrices A ∈
Rr×h and B ∈ Ro×r , where the rank r is times smaller than h and o for parameter saving. Similar
to Kopiczko et al. (2023), this product can be further reparameterized as the sum of outer products
of the corresponding row and column vectors. Formally, the whole process can be presented as:
                                                                   r
                                                                   X
                      W = W0 + ∆W = W0 + BA = W0 +                       bi ⊗ ai ,                  (1)
                                                                   i=1

where W is the updated weight, and ai and bi denote the i-th row and column vectors of low-rank
matrices A and B, respectively. This reparameterization trick enables the weight update to be the
linear combination of outer products of multiple vector pairs, which will be extensively utilized in
our subsequent analysis. Generally, LoRA will be applied to each linear layers in all the Transformer
blocks of a model (Vaswani et al., 2017) for better performance (Dettmers et al., 2023), which is also
applied to our analysis by default.
Pure parameter sharing does not necessarily boost up the parameter efficiency of LoRA. Al-
though VeRA and PRoLoRA achieve better performance than LoRA via parameter sharing, we
demonstrate that this causality is not universally applicable. To facilitate our subsequent compar-
isons, we introduce a straightforward sharing scheme, detailed in Sec. 3.1. Briefly, this scheme
shares the low-rank matrices A and B across all Transformer blocks for each type of linear layer.
As shown in Table 1, we set the same low-level trainable parameter budget for all methods, eliminat-
ing the disturbance of parameter redundancy and enabling clear comparison of their representation

Table 1: Results of LLaMA2-7B with different sharing and differentiation methods across diverse
instruction following datasets. “+ Random Scaling” and “+ Subset Selection” denote the individual
integration of them into the “Pure Sharing” scheme, respectively. The details of these benchmarks
are elaborated in Sec. 4.
                                        MMLU     BBH     GSM8K       TyDi QA         HumanEval
       Method         Rank   # Param.                                                            Avg.
                                         EM       EM          EM    F1       EM        P@1
       LoRA             2     5.00M     44.77    36.22    26.28    48.67    35.70      18.24     34.98
    Pure Sharing       64     5.00M     43.61    35.15    26.54    49.12    36.04      15.53     34.33
    + Random Scaling 64       5.00M     43.98    35.30    29.04    49.03    35.73      15.58     34.77
    + Subset Selection 64     5.00M     45.56    36.76    28.18    50.33    37.22      18.64     36.12



                                                  3
