                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




                                         S CALING D IFFUSION L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                                         VIA A DAPTATION FROM AUTOREGRESSIVE M ODELS
                                                                 ∗
                                          Shansan Gong∗1 , Shivam Agarwal∗2 , Yizhe Zhang3 , Jiacheng Ye1 , Lin Zheng1
                                          Mukai Li1 , Chenxin An1 , Peilin Zhao4 , Wei Bi4 , Hao Peng2 , Jiawei Han2 , Lingpeng Kong1
                                          1
                                            The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
                                          3
                                            Apple 4 Tencent AI Lab
                                          sansa933@connect.hku.hk,shivama2@illinois.edu




arXiv:2410.17891v3 [cs.CL] 31 May 2025
                                                                                       A BSTRACT

                                                      Diffusion Language Models (DLMs) have emerged as a promising new paradigm
                                                      for text generative modeling, potentially addressing limitations of autoregressive
                                                      (AR) models. However, current DLMs have been studied at a smaller scale com-
                                                      pared to their AR counterparts and lack fair comparison on language modeling
                                                      benchmarks. Additionally, training diffusion models from scratch at scale remains
                                                      challenging. Given the prevalence of open-source AR language models, we pro-
                                                      pose adapting these models to build text diffusion models. We demonstrate con-
                                                      nections between AR and diffusion modeling objectives and introduce a simple
                                                      continual pre-training approach for training diffusion models. Through system-
                                                      atic evaluation on language modeling, reasoning, and commonsense benchmarks,
                                                      we show that we can convert AR models ranging from 127M to 7B parameters
                                                      (GPT2 and LLaMA) into diffusion models DiffuGPT and DiffuLLaMA, using
                                                      less than 200B tokens for training. Our experimental results reveal that these
                                                      models outperform earlier DLMs and are competitive with their AR counterparts.
                                                      We release a suite of DLMs (127M-355M-7B) capable of generating fluent text,
                                                      performing in-context learning, filling in the middle without prompt re-ordering,
                                                      and following instructions. https://github.com/HKUNLP/DiffuLLaMA


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION

                                         Large language models (LLMs) have ushered in a new era of artificial intelligence, demonstrating
                                         remarkable capabilities in generating high-quality text, in-context learning, and following complex
                                         instructions (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a). These advancements are primarily rooted in
                                         the scaling up of autoregressive (AR) language models. During both training and inference, these
                                         models leverage vast datasets and billions of parameters, employing a strict left-to-right sequential
                                         process for memorization and generation. This approach has resulted in the emergence of intelli-
                                         gence capable of tackling diverse tasks (Wei et al., 2022a; Hoffmann et al., 2024). However, the
                                         ultimate upper limit of intelligence achievable through this paradigm remains an open question.
                                         While AR mechanisms form the foundation of current LLMs, they are not without limitations (Lin
                                         et al., 2021). Notable challenges include difficulties in future planning (Bachmann & Nagarajan,
                                         2024; Hu* et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024) and self-correction (Huang et al., 2024). These constraints
                                         have spurred researchers to explore alternative architectures for next-generation LLMs.
                                         A compelling direction in current research focuses on the development of text diffusion models (Li
                                         et al., 2023b). Building upon the rapid evolution of diffusion models in various domains (Ho et al.,
                                         2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021), innovative text diffusion models (Li et al.,
                                         2022; Lou et al., 2024) have opened up new possibilities for text generation. A unifying insight
                                         across these models is the potential of diffusion language models (DLMs) for controllable (Venka-
                                         traman et al., 2024), any-order, and parallel text generation (Gong et al., 2023a). Notably, DLMs
                                         exhibit promising capabilities in intermediate token correction (Ye et al., 2024b) and global plan-
                                         ning (Zhang et al., 2023), thereby addressing key limitations inherent in the AR approach.
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal contribution


                                                                                              1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




Despite the promising potential of text diffusion models, the relatively small model size limits the
competitiveness of DLMs compared to AR models. Existing state-of-the-art DLMs such as Plaid
1B (Gulrajani & Hashimoto, 2023) and SEDD (Lou et al., 2024) are relatively small in size (127M-
1B parameters) and under-trained, with less than 400B tokens of training data. This substantial gap
in scale prevents fair comparisons with larger AR language models on many advanced capabilities
and tasks, such as chain-of-thought reasoning abilities on complex mathematical benchmarks. Re-
cent approaches (Ye et al., 2023) attempt adapt LLaMA models to DLMs based on masked language
modeling (He et al., 2023). However, they find that the base model capabilities are lost during their
adaptation stage. Pre-training at such a scale is extremely resource-intensive, and the challenge is
even more pronounced for diffusion models. These models lack the computational optimizations
that have been developed for LLMs (Samragh et al., 2024) and require significantly more resources
than their AR counterparts, as noted by Gulrajani & Hashimoto (2023).
Given these scaling challenges, pre-trained LLMs emerge as an invaluable resource that we can
leverage, considering the extensive computational efforts already invested in their development. This
strategy aligns with recent trends where new models are scaled up or adapted to new architectures
using existing LLMs (Wang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024c). However, building DLMs through
adaptation from AR models is non-trivial due to fundamental differences in their language modeling
objectives. Two key distinctions present significant hurdles. First, AR models employ causal mask-
ing to prevent future information leakage, whereas diffusion models utilize bi-directional attention
masks. Second, an AR LM processes clean inputs to predict subsequent tokens at each step, while a
diffusion model operates on noisy inputs to predict their denoised versions.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a simple adaptation approach that bridges these discrep-
ancies. We unify their modeling objectives (§3.2) and address the architectural differences by break-
ing the causal masking bias in AR models through attention mask annealing (§3.3). Additionally,
we inherit the shift operation from AR models (§3.3). This streamlined adaptation recipe enables us
to construct a pre-trained DLM that can effectively compete in the arena of LLMs. Building on this
approach, we leverage the FineWeb (Penedo et al., 2024) and SlimPajama (Soboleva et al., 2023)
pre-training corpora to continue training small and medium-sized DLMs based on GPT2 (Brown
et al., 2020), and further train up to a 7B model based on LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023b).
Our experiments provide a comprehensive comparison between AR LMs and DLMs across lan-
guage modeling, reasoning, and infilling tasks. The evaluation encompasses diverse settings, in-
cluding zero-shot, few-shot, and fine-tuning scenarios, addressing the limitations of relying solely
on perplexity in previous works (Shi et al., 2024). Our contributions and empirical findings include:

• We demonstrate that by narrowing the gap between AR models and DLMs, it is possible to con-
  vert 127M-7B AR models (GPT2 and LLaMA2) into DiffuGPT and DiffuLLaMA with training
  on less than 200B tokens. Notably, DiffuGPT outperforms GPT2 in most tasks.
• We adapt 7B AR models to DLMs, greatly expanding the expertise compared to smaller-sized
  diffusion models. DiffuLLaMA emerges as the state-of-the-art DLM, exhibiting in-context learn-
  ing, code generation, and strong infilling capabilities. Its generation speed is competitive with
  AR counterparts for unconditionally generating 1024 tokens using 256 diffusion timesteps.
• We provide a comprehensive benchmark for DLMs and release our adapted diffusion models
  (127M, 355M and 7B) along with open-source adaptation code, efficient fine-tuning scripts, and
  evaluation toolkits.


2   P RELIMINARY AND N OTATION

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021b) are latent variable generative models characterized by a forward and a reverse Markov
process. We denote x0 ∼ pdata (x0 ) as the variable following the data distribution, and xt ∼
q(xt ) as the noisy variable of x0 at time t, where the maximum time is T . The forward pro-
                     QT
cess q(x1:T |x0 ) = t=1 q(xt |xt−1 ) corrupts the initial data x0 into a sequence of increasingly
noisy variables x1:T . Accordingly, the backward Markov process models the joint probability as
                     QT
pθ (x0:T ) = pθ (xT ) t=1 pθ (xt−1 |xt ), which gradually denoises xt to reconstruct the original data
x0 . Parameters θ are learned by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of x0 , which can be opti-


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025




              AR Language Models                                    Adaptation                                      Adapted Diffusion Language Models
    Train                                                                                                  Train                               Predict

    Logits         ℎ! ℎ" ℎ$       ℎ% ℎ#                                                                    Inputs   𝑥!     𝑥"    𝑥$ 𝑥%          Inputs
                                                                                                                                                         𝑥"     𝑥$ 𝑥%
                                                                                                                    ≈ 𝑥!   ≈𝑥"   ≈𝑥 #   ≈𝑥 $       𝑓!
    Labels 𝑥!      𝑥"    𝑥$ 𝑥% 𝑥#               Causal mask         Attention mask      Full attention     Logits   ℎ! ℎ" ℎ$ ℎ%                          ℎ" ℎ$ ℎ%
                                                                    annealing           w/o mask
                                                                                                           Labels
    Predict
    inputs    𝑥!        𝑓!   ℎ!    𝑥"                                                                       𝑥! 𝑥"          𝑥$ 𝑥% 𝑥#            (iterative) 𝑥$   𝑥% 𝑥#
                                                𝑓!   LM   CE Loss       Attention weights    Mask states
                                  (iterative)


Figure 1: The overview of our approach to adapt autoregressive (AR) models to diffusion models.
Left: The shift operation in AR models enables the output layer hi to approximate the distribution of
next tokens xi+1 in hidden representations through the cross entropy (CE) loss. Middle: We remove
the causal mask gradually during training eventually making our model bi-directional. Right: inside
the diffusion models we shift the logits to compute the loss with the next token (i.e., the loss on hi
would be with respect to xi+1 ), while perceptually, the diffusion models are still functioning as
recovering the original signals (since hi corresponds to xi+1 in AR loss).


mized through the evidence lower bound (ELBO),
           − log pθ (x0 ) ≤ Eq(x1 |x0 ) [− log pθ (x0 |x1 )] + DKL (q(xT |x0 )||pθ (xT )) + LT ,     (1)
             PT
with LT = t=2 Eq(xt |x0 ) [DKL (q(xt−1 |xt , x0 )||pθ (xt−1 |xt ))]. For continuous text diffusion (Li
et al., 2022; Gong et √  al., 2023b), at each forward step, perturbations are applied according to
q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I), where βt ∈ (0, 1) represents different scales across
time steps such that xT ∼ N (0, I). In the case of discrete denoising models (Ho et al., 2020;
Austin et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2024a), the forward process is defined as a categorical distribution
q(xt |xt−1 ) = Cat(xt ; Q⊤  t xt−1 ), where each xt ∈ {0, 1}
                                                                 K
                                                                    is a one-hot vector with vocabulary
                     K×K
size K, Qt ∈ [0, 1]          is the transition matrix, and each entry [Qt ]ij denotes the probability of
transition from the state i to j. We build on the formulation of absorbing discrete diffusion (Austin
et al., 2021), which specifies Qt = (1 − βt )I + βt 1m⊤ . We denote 1 as an all-one vector of size
K and m as the one-hot encoding of a special [MASK] token in the vocabulary. Therefore, the
transition matrix, Qt indicates that with probability 1 − βt , xt remains
                                                                        Qt       unchanged; otherwise, it
transitions to m, becoming absorbed into [MASK]. Letting Qt := i=1 Qi = αt I + (1 − αt )1m⊤
            Qt
and αt := i=1 (1 − βt ), the distribution of xt conditional on x0 is given by
                                                     ⊤
         q(xt |x0 ) = Cat(xt ; Qt x0 ) = αt Ix0 + (1 − αt )m1⊤ x0 = αt x0 + (1 − αt )m,    (2)
since x0 is a one-hot vector and thus 1⊤ x0 = 1. We expect αT to approach 0 such that the full
noise data xT equals m with probability 1.
The discrete time representation of t ∈ [0, T ], restricts xt to fixed noise ratios. To avoid this bias
and enable sampling from any noisy representation, we use continuous-time sampling, allowing t to
span any point within [0, 1] (Kingma et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Ou et al., 2024).
Continuous-time sampling is equivalent to dividing [0, 1] into T intervals and where T → ∞. For
any 0 ≤ s < t ≤ 1, the forward process generalizes to q(xt |xs ). We will use this continuous-time
notation in the following sections.

3        M ODEL
We begin by formulating the continuous-time discrete diffusion process (§3.1) and establishing a
connection between the discrete diffusion and autoregressive objectives (§3.2). Based on this equiv-
alence, we propose an adaptation approach (§3.3) and a sampling algorithm (§3.4) for diffusion
models adapted from AR models. The whole process is illustrated in Figure 1.

3.1  C ONTINUOUS - TIME D ISCRETE D IFFUSION P ROCESSES
                                    P
Following Eq.2 and q(xt |x0 ) =       xs q(xt |xs )q(xs |x0 ), the forward transition distribution be-
tween arbitrary points s < t can be derived as
                                              ⊤          αt            αt
                       q(xt |xs ) = Cat(xt ; Qs|t xs ) =    xs + (1 −     )m,                      (3)
                                                         αs            αs

                                                                                  3
