                                            Diffusion of Thought: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
                                                       in Diffusion Language Models


                                                             Jiacheng Ye1∗, Shansan Gong1∗, Liheng Chen1∗, Lin Zheng1 ,
                                                Jiahui Gao ,Han Shi2 ,Chuan Wu1 ,Xin Jiang2 , Zhenguo Li2 ,Wei Bi3 ,Lingpeng Kong1
                                                             2
                                                    1
                                                      The University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Tencent AI Lab




arXiv:2402.07754v3 [cs.CL] 5 Dec 2024
                                                                         {carsonye, sansa933}@connect.hku.hk



                                                                                         Abstract
                                                     Recently, diffusion models have garnered significant interest in the field of text
                                                     processing due to their many potential advantages compared to conventional
                                                     autoregressive models. In this work, we propose Diffusion-of-Thought (DoT),
                                                     a novel approach that integrates diffusion models with Chain-of-Thought, a
                                                     well-established technique for improving the reasoning ability of autoregressive
                                                     language models. In contrast to autoregressive language models that make decisions
                                                     in a left-to-right, token-by-token manner, DoT allows reasoning steps to diffuse over
                                                     time through a diffusion language model and offers greater flexibility in trading-off
                                                     computation for reasoning performance. Our experimental results demonstrate
                                                     the effectiveness of DoT in multi-digit multiplication, boolean logic, and grade
                                                     school math problems, with a small diffusion model outperforming a much larger
                                                     autoregressive model in both efficiency and accuracy. In addition to that, DoT
                                                     showcases promising self-correction abilities and benefits from existing reasoning-
                                                     enhancing techniques like self-consistency decoding. Our findings contribute to
                                                     the understanding and development of reasoning with diffusion language models.


                                        1       Introduction
                                        Large language models (LLMs) have had a profound impact on the entire field of artificial
                                        intelligence [42, 50], transforming our approach to addressing classical problems in natural language
                                        processing and machine learning. Among the most notable aspects of LLMs is their remarkable
                                        reasoning ability, which many researchers consider to be a representative emergent capability
                                        brought about by LLMs [53]. Chain-of-thought prompting (CoT) [54]), which generates a series
                                        of intermediate reasoning steps in autoregressive (AR) way, has emerged as a central technique to
                                        support complex reasoning processes in LLMs. Despite advancements, errors in intermediate CoT
                                        steps can lead to inaccurate answers [32], posing self-correction difficulties [25], and concerns about
                                        CoT’s inefficiency have been highlighted in recent studies [7].
                                        Recently, diffusion models have attracted interest in text processing [33, 65, 69] as a result of success
                                        in the vision domain and distinctive modeling strengths over autoregressive models [34], offering
                                        potential benefits including global planning ability [59, 63], self correction [23] and efficiency [37].
                                        As part of the research community effort, pre-trained diffusion language models such as Plaid [18]
                                        and SEDD [37] have shown significant progress in text generation capabilities. Although they have
                                        not yet attained the scale and capabilities of existing proprietary autoregressive LLMs like GPT-4 [42],
                                        these models have demonstrated performance on par with GPT2 [4] and the scaling law [27] in
                                        diffusion language models have been highlighted in Plaid. As a result, it becomes pertinent to explore
                                        the following question: can diffusion language models also leverage the CoT-style technique to gain
                                        enhanced complex reasoning abilities?
                                            ∗
                                                Equal contribution.


                                        38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
This work presents a preliminary study on this                            AR                       Thought      Thought
                                                       (a)      Input               Output
question. We propose Diffusion of Thought                                                          in text      in hidden

(DoT), an inherent chain-of-thought method                     Answer-only                            Reasoning path
tailored for diffusion models. In essence,
                                                                                       AR
DoT progressively updates a sequence of latent         (b)      Input                                Output
variables representing thoughts in the hidden
                                                               Chain-of-thought
space, allowing reasoning steps to diffuse over
time in parallel. We also introduce a multi-pass       (c)      Input                        (d)       Input
variant of DoT which focuses on generating                           Neural Network                          Diffusion Model
one thought at a time to compensate for causal                               layer 1                                    t=T
bias. To condition on complex queries, instead                                 …                                         …
of using gradient-based classifier guidance [18,                             layer n                                   t=0
33], DoT trains and samples from the denoising
model using the classifier-free guidance as                    Output                                Output
in Gong et al. [15], to provide more reliable
controlling signals on exact tokens.                    Implicit chain-of-thought            Diffusion-of-thought (DoT)

Furthermore, to improve the self-correcting
capability of the diffusion model, DoT integrates Figure 1: Illustration of reasoning approaches.
training-time sampling algorithms to learn to (a) Answer-only and (b) CoT generate left-to-
recover from errors originating from prior or right tokens by prompting autoregressive language
current reasoning steps. This feature offers model. (c) Implicit CoT replaces horizontal
a fresh angle on the issue of error accumula- reasoning (CoT) with vertical reasoning from
tion [25, 32] inherent in autoregressive models. shallow layer to deep layer [7]. (d) DoT generates
Finally, we adapt a conditional ODE Solver [39] reasoning path along with the diffusion timesteps.
for DoT during inference time to accelerate the
inference of continuous diffusion models. We show DoT enjoys flexibility in trading off computation
(reasoning time) and performance as more complex problems may necessitate increased computation
in reasoning [2, 54].
From a methodological standpoint, DoT shares similarities with the recently proposed Implicit CoT
approach [7], where the latter learns thoughts in hidden states across transformer layers to improve
the time efficiency of autoregressive CoT generation. A schematic illustration of CoT, Implicit CoT,
and DoT can be found in Figure 1.
The main contributions of our paper are threefold:
      1. We first introduce the reasoning technique for diffusion models (DoT), and showcase
         its advantages in simple reasoning tasks (digit multiplication and boolean logic) when
         compared to autoregressive CoT and Implicit CoT. DoT achieves up to 27× speed-up
         without performance drop (§4.2).
      2. We further adapt DoT to continuous and discrete diffusion base models, and introduce
         two training-time sampling algorithms to improve its self-correction ability. DoT exhibits
         superior performance compared to GPT2 with CoT on grade school math problems, enabling
         a small diffusion model to outperform a 4.6x larger autoregressive model, showing the
         potential of text diffusion models for complex reasoning (§4.3).
      3. Our analysis demonstrates the flexibility of DoT in the trade-off between reasoning time and
         performance (§4.4), and showcases DoT’s self-correction capability (§4.6). We also find
         that self-consistency decoding can further improve DoT and its multi-pass variant (§4.5).
Although it is challenging for current pre-trained diffusion language models to directly compete with
LLMs that are hundreds of times larger in parameter size, our study emphasizes the possibility of their
complex reasoning abilities and highlights the substantial potential in developing LLMs that go be-
yond the autoregressive paradigm. We release all the codes at https://github.com/HKUNLP/diffusion-
of-thoughts.

2   Preliminaries
This section introduces key concepts and notations in diffusion models for text generation. Detailed
formulations and derivations are provided in Appendix A.


                                                   2
A typical diffusion model contains the forward and reverse process. For each forward step q(zt |zt−1 ),
we gradually inject noise into the data representation zt−1 from the last timestep to obtain zt . Here
t = 1, 2, ..., T and the larger t corresponds to noisier data. For reverse process, the ultimate goal
                                                                    QT
is to recover the original z0 by denoising zt : pθ (z0:T ) := p(zT ) t=1 pθ (zt−1 |zt ). We model the
learning process pθ (zt−1 |zt ) using the proposed diffusion model zθ (zt , t).
Previous text generation using diffusion models almost contains two categories: (1) Continuous
diffusion models such as Diffusion-LM [33], which relies on a mapping function between the
real values and feasible integral point; (2) Discrete diffusion models like D3PM [1], which
directly formulate the problem as the integer program. Continuous diffusion models map the
discrete text w into a continuous space through an embedding function E MB(w), and its inverse
        √ is called rounding. The forward perturbations are applied according to q(zt |zt−1 ) =
operation
N (zt ; 1 − βt zt−1 , βt I), where βt ∈ (0, 1) represents different scales of the Gaussian noise.
Plaid [18] is a continuous diffusion language model trained from scratch on 314B tokens with
1024 context size. It is currently the largest scale diffusion language model with 1.3B parameters.
In the case of discrete diffusion models, each zt is represented as a discrete random variable using
one-hot vectors in {0, 1}K , where K denotes the vocabulary size. They define q(zt |zt−1 ) through a
transition matrix, making it a point mass with probability on an absorbing state [MASK] or a uniform
distribution over the vocabulary size. SEDD [37] is a recently trained-from-scratch discrete diffusion
language model with small and medium size similar to GPT2.
For sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) generation, which involves a pair of sequences wx and wy ,
DiffuSeq [15] treats these two sequences as a single one wz = w[x;y] and uses a left-aligned
mask [0; 1] during the forward and reverse diffusion process to distinguish them. Unlike traditional
diffusion models that corrupt the entire zt , DiffuSeq only adds noise to those entries with the mask
value of 1 (e.g., yt ). This modification, termed partial noising, tailors diffusion models for conditional
language generation, and set a difference between the gradient-based token guidance in [33] and
[18].

3     Diffusion-of-Thoughts
In this section, we begin with an overview of our method and its relationship with other reasoning
paradigms (§3.1). We then introduce Diffusion-of-Thoughts (DoT) as well as its multi-pass variant
(DoTMP ; §3.2), as illustrated in Figure 2. Following this, we outline the implementation of our
training (§3.3) and inference (§3.4) protocols.

3.1   Overview

Without loss of generality, we use the mathematical problem-solving task as our running example.
A problem statement and its correct answer are denoted as s and a, respectively. We employ a
language model with parameters θ, represented as pLM        θ , to find the solution for each problem. For
regular usage of language models without Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT), the final answer a is generated
directly as a ∼ pLM   θ (a|s). The CoT approach introduces meaningful intermediate steps or rationales
r1 , . . . , rn for language models to bridge s and a, resulting in the output a ∼ pLM   θ (a|s, r1...n ). For
implicit CoT [7], the hidden representations of rationales z1 , . . . , zn are distilled into transformer
layers, leading to a ∼ piCoTθ   (a|s, z1...n ). Similarly but differently, for DoT, these representations are
distributed over diffusion timestep t as a ∼ pDoT  θ (a|s, zt ), where zt corresponds exactly to the noised
data in diffusion models.

3.2   Modeling

We begin by observing the gradient-based token guidance fails to do accurate conditioning as the
model cannot exactly recover each conditioning token (see Table 2). This is vital, especially in
mathematical reasoning, as it is expected to perform reasoning based on exact tokens (e.g., numbers)
in the problem statement, rather than more compact gradient signals. For this, we adopt DiffuSeq-
style [15] classifier-free conditioning during the fine-tuning of Plaid, where all rationales are generated
by the backward diffusion process in parallel, with all the conditional tokens fixed as still. Specifically,
the problem context s is concatenated with the rationales r1...n during training and sampling, while
the noise is only partially imposed to the rationale part in r1...n , keeping s anchored as the condition.


                                                      3
