                                         Preprint




                                             S ILKIE : P REFERENCE D ISTILLATION FOR L ARGE
                                         V ISUAL L ANGUAGE M ODELS
                                          Lei Li1† Zhihui Xie1† Mukai Li1 Shunian Chen2 Peiyi Wang3 Liang Chen3
                                          Yazheng Yang1 Benyou Wang2 Lingpeng Kong1
                                          1
                                            The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
                                          3
                                            Peking University
                                          {nlp.lilei, zhxieml, kaikiaia3, wangpeiyi9979}@gmail.com
                                          shunian.chen@link.cuhk.edu.cn leo.liang.chen@outlook.com




arXiv:2312.10665v1 [cs.CV] 17 Dec 2023
                                          wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn lpk@cs.hku.hk



                                                                                        A BSTRACT

                                                      This paper explores preference distillation for large vision language mod-
                                                      els (LVLMs), improving their ability to generate helpful and faithful responses
                                                      anchoring the visual context. We first build a vision-language feedback (VLFeed-
                                                      back) dataset utilizing AI annotation. Specifically, responses are generated by
                                                      models sampled from 12 LVLMs, conditioned on multi-modal instructions sourced
                                                      from various datasets. We adopt GPT-4V to assess the generated outputs regard-
                                                      ing helpfulness, visual faithfulness, and ethical considerations. Furthermore, the
                                                      preference supervision is distilled into Qwen-VL-Chat through the direct prefer-
                                                      ence optimization (DPO) method. The resulting model Silkie, achieves 6.9% and
                                                      9.5% relative improvement on the MME benchmark regarding the perception and
                                                      cognition capabilities, respectively. Silkie also demonstrates reduced hallucination
                                                      by setting a new state-of-the-art score of 3.02 on the MMHal-Bench benchmark.
                                                      Further analysis shows that DPO with our VLFeedback dataset mainly boosts the
                                                      fine-grained perception and complex cognition abilities of LVLMs, leading to more
                                                      comprehensive improvements compared to human-annotated preference datasets.
                                                      Project page: https://vlf-silkie.github.io.


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION

                                         In recent years, there has been a rapid evolution in the development of large vision language models
                                         (LVLMs), epitomized by the remarkable achievements of the GPT-4V model (OpenAI, 2023a).
                                         The integration of language and visual components through modality alignment (Alayrac et al.,
                                         2022; Awadalla et al., 2023), coupled with supervised fine-tuning on instruction tuning datasets (Liu
                                         et al., 2023c; Li et al., 2023c; Zhu et al., 2023), has endowed LVLMs with promising perceptual
                                         and cognitive abilities (Yang et al., 2023). This augmentation enables them to engage in nuanced
                                         reasoning over images and deliver responses according to user queries. Despite these advancements,
                                         open-sourced LVLMs still exhibit misalignment issues that pose a potential risk of generating
                                         misleading content without anchoring to the provided visual context (Li et al., 2023d; Sun et al.,
                                         2023), or biased responses against minority groups (OpenAI, 2023a). Consequently, addressing and
                                         rectifying the misalignment behavior of LVLMs is crucial to enhance their reliability and mitigate the
                                         risk of generating biased outputs.
                                         In this paper, inspired by the success of reinforcement learning from AI feedback (RLAIF) in
                                         improving LLMs alignment with AI preference (Tunstall et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Cui et al.,
                                         2023), we enhance LVLMs by distilling the preference annotation from a powerful LVLM, i.e., GPT-
                                         4V (OpenAI, 2023a). We first construct a high-quality instruction set by collecting from various multi-
                                         modal instruction tuning sources, including general conversation and reasoning instructions from
                                         LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023c) and SVIT (Zhao et al., 2023a), academic task instructions from M3IT (Li
                                         et al., 2023c), special datasets such as medical image understanding from PMC-VQA (Zhang et al.,
                                             †
                                                 Equal Contribution.


                                                                                               1
Preprint




           Instruction Source                     Comparison Pairs                            GPT4-V Preference Annotation

           ! LLaVA                                     Does the tent in the                                Helpfulness
                     ComVint                           picture have a red and
     " M3IT                                                                                                  B >A= D> C
                 LLaVA-Med                             black checkered pattern                     Text A incorrectly states that the
                                                                                                  tent has a red and black checkered
                …                                      on the top?                                  pattern, which is not the case.

                                                                                                     Visual Faithfulness
                                  Model A: Yes, the tent in the picture has a red and black
            LVLM Pool                         checkered pattern on the top.                                  B >A= C= D
                                                                                                     Text B is highly faithful to the
                                                                                                      visual content of the image,
                GPT4-V            Model B: No, the tent in the picture does not have a              correctly identifying the actual
                                  red and black checkered pattern on the top. It appears to       pattern on the tent and the umbrella.
        Qwen-VL-Chat              have a yellow and white striped pattern. The red and
                                  black checkered pattern you’re referring to is actually
                                                                                                   Ethical Considerations
               ! LLaVA            on the umbrella that someone is holding.

            IDEFICS                                                                                         A= B = C= D
              …                   Model C: Yes.                                                      While the Text C is brief and
                                                                                                      incorrect, it does not raise
                                  Model D: Yes, there is a tent with red and black                     ethical concerns directly.
                                  checkered pattern on the top.



Figure 1: The annotation framework of our vision-language feedback (VLFeedback) dataset. We
collect instructions from various sources and decode the corresponding responses using 4 models
sampled from the LVLM pool. The GPT-4V model assesses these responses regarding three aspects,
providing ratings and rationales for the scores.


2023a) and text-rich understanding from LLaVaR and complex visual reasoning from ComVint (Du
et al., 2023). There are 80k instructions in total, covering 65k unique images. We further built a
pool of 12 LVLMs including BLIP-family Li et al. (2023b); Dai et al. (2023), LLaVA-series (Liu
et al., 2023c;b; Sun et al., 2023), Fuyu-8B (Bavishi et al., 2023), Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2023)
and GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023a), to obtain corresponding responses conditioned on our collected
instructions. We randomly sample 4 models for each instruction to obtain the corresponding outputs,
resulting in 28k multi-modal instruction and response pairs for preference annotation. As annotating
response preferences with human annotators is infeasible regarding large-scale responses and can
be cumbersome due to the subjectivity in the annotation process, GPT-4V is adopted to assess the
quality of different model outputs. To achieve this, we define evaluation templates to evaluate LVLMs
outputs from three aspects: (i) Helpfulness, aims to evaluate whether the response is relevant for
the user query and improves the user understanding for the visual content; (ii) Visual Faithfulness,
focuses on the consistency between the visual clues and response, aiming for detecting potential
ungrounded hallucination; and (iii) Ethical Considerations, targets to examine whether the response
contains any offensive or biased content. GPT-4V is then queried with the annotation templates, the
image, and corresponding instructions to assess the quality of different model outputs. The annotated
preference ranking dataset, named vision-language feedback (VLFeedback), enables us to explore
the effect of preference distillation for LVLMs.
With the VLFeedback dataset, we use direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023a)
to build our Silkie model based on Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023). Our experimental results reveal
that the preference distillation effectively improves the overall capabilities of multi-modal tasks. For
example, on the MME benchmark (Fu et al., 2023), Silkie outperforms the base model by 6.9%
and 9.5% in perception and cognition tasks, respectively. Furthermore, with visual faithfulness as
an annotation aspect, Silkie could produce responses that are more aligned with the visual context,
indicated by the new state-of-the-art score of 3.02 on the hallucination evaluation benchmark MMHal-
Bench (Sun et al., 2023). Additional in-depth investigation of performance improvements shows
that VLFeedback provides more pronounced improvements on fine-grained perception tasks such
as Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and complex cognition-level reasoning tasks such as code
reasoning. Intriguingly, we also find that the AI-annotated preference boosts the LVLMs more
consistently than the human-annotated preference dataset (Yu et al., 2023), potentially due to the
comprehensive coverage of our preference dataset. These findings substantiate the value of our
VLFeedback dataset for future studies towards building LVLMs better aligned with humans.
In summary, the contribution of this work is two-fold: (i) We construct VLFeedback, a large-scale
multi-modal preference dataset annotated by GPT-4V on three curated aspects, covering 80k multi-


                                                                2
Preprint




    Dataset        Dataset Description                                     # Sampled Instructions
    LLaVA          Visual Instruction Synthesized by GPT-4                          19,614
    SVIT           Scaled-up Visual Instruction Synthesized by GPT-4                22,823
    LLaVAR         Text-rich Image Understanding                                    13,770
    LRV            Robust Visual Instruction                                        12,357
    LLaVAMed       Biomedical Vision-Language Instruction                            5,861
    ComVint        Complex Visual Reasoning Instruction                              2,384
    PMC-VQA        Medical Image Question Answering                                  2,364
    M3IT           Academic Vision-Language Tasks                                     687
    PCA-EVAL       Embodied Decision-making Instruction                               398
    Total          Visual instruction in multi-domains                              80,258

      Table 1: Descriptions and statistics of multi-modal instructions in our VLFeedback dataset.


modal instructions and decoded by 12 performant LVLMs; (ii) Experimental results and analysis
demonstrate that performing DPO on our VLFeedback dataset improves LVLMs comprehensively,
providing insights for future LVLM alignment research.


2     V ISUAL -L ANGUAGE F EEDBACK DATASET

In this section, we elaborate on the construction process of our visual-language feedback (VLFeed-
back) dataset, as illustrated in the Figure 1. We first introduce the multi-modal instructions
sources (§2.1), followed by the details of selected LVLMs for decoding (§2.2) and the annotation
with GPT-4V (§2.3). Finally, we present the statistics of our VLFeedback dataset (§2.4).

2.1    I NSTRUCTION S OURCE

We curate instruction sources from diverse datasets that span various capabilities of LVLMs across
different domains. Our selection encompasses:

        • General Vision-Language Instructions: Featuring datasets such as LLaVA (Liu et al.,
          2023c) and SVIT (Zhao et al., 2023a), these datasets are constructed by inputting textual
          descriptions of images to ChatGPT/GPT-4. They prompt the generation of visual-related in-
          structions that encompass diverse types, including detailed descriptions, reasoning processes,
          and interactive conversations.
        • Academic Vision-Language Instructions: Drawn from 20 samples of each task in M3IT (Li
          et al., 2023c), this set offers comprehensive coverage of previous academic vision-language
          tasks such as visual question answering, image captioning and classification.
        • Robustness-oriented Vision-Language Instructions: Challenging instructions from
          datasets like LRV (Liu et al., 2023a), demanding complex visual reasoning from LVLMs,
          and ComVint (Du et al., 2023), which introduces misleading queries in the instructions, are
          incorporated to enrich the coverage of our dataset.
        • Domain-specific Vision-Language Instructions: We incorporate LLaVAR (Zhang et al.,
          2023b), emphasizing text-rich images like documents and logos; PMC-VQA (Zhang et al.,
          2023a) for medical images; LLaVAMed (Li et al., 2023a) for biomedical images; and PCA-
          EVAL (Chen et al., 2023a), designed for visual decision-making instructions in embodied
          environments. These instructions require domain knowledge that is potentially useful for
          downstream applications.

Table 1 summarizes the characteristics and statistics of instruction sources sampled in our paper.

2.2    M ODEL P OOL

We have curated a diverse model pool comprising 12 LVLMs to cover recent advancements, including:


                                                   3
