                                        Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




                                        Empowering Large Language Model Agents through Action
                                        Learning

                                                 Haiteng Zhao1 Chang Ma3 Guoyin Wang2 Jing Su2 Lingpeng Kong3
                                                            Jingjing Xu2 Zhi-Hong Deng1 Hongxia Yang2
                                                       1 Peking University 2 ByteDance 3 The University of Hong Kong




                                                                                       Abstract




arXiv:2402.15809v2 [cs.AI] 8 Aug 2024
                                                 Large Language Model (LLM) Agents have recently garnered increasing interest
                                                 yet they are limited in their ability to learn from trial and error, a key element of
                                                 intelligent behavior. In this work, we argue that the capacity to learn new actions
                                                 from experience is fundamental to the advancement of learning in LLM agents.
                                                 While humans naturally expand their action spaces and develop skills through
                                                 experiential learning, LLM agents typically operate within fixed action spaces,
                                                 limiting their potential for growth. To address these challenges, our study explores
                                                 open-action learning for language agents. We introduce a framework LearnAct with
                                                 an iterative learning strategy to create and improve actions in the form of Python
                                                 functions. In each iteration, LLM revises and updates the currently available actions
                                                 based on the errors identified in unsuccessful training tasks, thereby enhancing
                                                 action effectiveness. Our experimental evaluations across Robotic Planning and
                                                 Alfworld environments reveal that after learning on a few training task instances,
                                                 our approach to open-action learning markedly improves agent performance for the
                                                 type of task—by 32% in AlfWorld compared to ReAct+Reflexion, for instance—
                                                 highlighting the importance of experiential action learning in the development of
                                                 more intelligent LLM agents.



                                        1   Introduction

                                        Language agents, which employ the large language model (LLM) as the policy model to control
                                        agents to iteratively take actions and interact with environments, have recently garnered increasing
                                        interest (Yao et al., 2023a; Brohan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Xie et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023;
                                        Xu et al., 2023). The underlying reason is that LLMs offer a fresh angle to address the commonsense
                                        issue that is difficult to tackle in the reinforcement learning paradigm which learns the agent policy
                                        solely from trial and error. Reasoning and planning of agents are often derived from prior knowledge
                                        in the particular environment, precisely where LLMs excel.
                                        Researchers increasingly recognize that, while leveraging LLMs for agent control shows promise,
                                        it is far from perfect due to their limited ability to learn from experience (Yao et al., 2023b; Shinn
                                        et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). The substantial scale of LLMs makes direct policy model finetuning
                                        impractical. Instead, LLMs depend on incorporating historical interactions into prompts to leverage
                                        past experiences for future action planning (Yao et al., 2023a; Shinn et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023;
                                        Madaan et al., 2023). However, these approaches are often constrained in their capacity to learn
                                        from long-term experiences and typically draw experience on single-instance examples (Wang et al.,
                                        2023c; Ma et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023a).
                                        While humans naturally expand their action spaces and develop skills through experiential learning,
                                        LLM agents typically operate within predetermined action spaces (Qin et al., 2023; Schick et al.,
                                        2023), limiting their potential for growth. In this work, we propose a novel learning paradigm
                                        for LLM agents that focuses on learning to expand and iteratively refine the action space, thereby
                                        aligning tasks more closely with the agents’ planning abilities. By adapting the action space to fit the
                                        LLM’s planning, we address the limitations imposed by fixed action spaces, such as the misalignment
                                        between commonsense knowledge-guided planning and actions, and the prevalence of action errors
                                        due to unmet prerequisites or ineffective strategies(Gu et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2024; Ahn et al.,


                                                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




              Train Stage: Create/Revise Learnable Actions                                                         Test Stage：Using Learned Actions                             with
" #" ! !"
   #    !$     %%$  "                       %                                               "                         "      !
                                                                                                                                Act
                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                    Prompting
                                                                                                                                      %
                 %                                             !       "
                                                                       Carry:        carry_to(    , !,   ,# ) #
     Pickup: pick( , ,                      )                          def carry_to(room1,room2,obj,gripper):            [Instruction]: You can use the following action: pick,
                                                                           try:
                                                                                                                         move, drop, carry_to, carry_two_to……
                                                                                move(room2,room1)
    Move: move(             ,           )                                  except:
                                                                                                                  User
                                                                                pass                                     [Goal]: You should perform actions to accomplish the goal:
                                                                           pick(obj,room1,gripper)                       ball1 is at roomb…ball10 is at roomb
                                                Action Learner             move(room1,room2)
     Drop: drop(        ,           ,       )                              drop(obj,room2,gripper)
                                                                                                                  [History]: Init obs: Ball1 is a ball. Ball1 is at rooma. Ball10 is a
                                                                                                                  ball. Ball10 is at rooma…… Left is a gripper. Left is free. Right is
                                                                                                                  a gripper. Right is free. Robby is at roomb. rooma is a room.
                                                                                                                  roomb is a room.
                                                      Error                  Augmented             Adapted        Action: move('roomb','rooma')
        Error: You already have a                                                                                 Obs: Ball1 is a ball. Ball1 is at rooma ……Robby is at rooma.
        ball in hand, cannot pick                   Feedback                Action Space         Policy Model
                                                                                                                  Action: carry_to('ball1','rooma','right')
        up another ball.
                                                                                                                  Obs: Ball1 is a ball. Ball1 is at roomb ……
        carry_to(   ,           ,       ,   )       move(     ,    )

                                                                                                    Act Agent              Action: carry_to('ball2','rooma','right’)
                            pick(           ,   ,    )      carry_two_to(    ,   ,    ,   )

                                                                                                                  Obs: Ball1 is a ball. Ball1 is at roomb. Ball2 is a ball. Ball2
                        Assess Agent on Training Instances                                                        is at roomb……


Figure 1: Illustration of the training and test stage of LearnAct: Left: During the training stage,
LearnAct expands the action space by first creating actions and then optimizing them based on
the execution feedback. Right: The test stage uses learned action space to facilitate sequential
decision-making. The prompting format follows the Act (Yao et al., 2023a) agent.


2022). This approach not only mitigates bottlenecks in language agent performance but also allows
transferring experience across different tasks.
For a more illustrative view, we could look at the example where an LLM agent is asked to make
cocktails. With a learnable and open action space, LLMs may naturally instruct the agent to gather
all the components in a specific order and mix them, while the closed action space may only involve
basic handling, such as moving to different places and grabbing bottles, which greatly increases the
difficulty of the task for LLM agent. On the other hand, it is necessary to update existing actions
to accommodate changing factors in the environment. Still, in the cocktail example, when making
an Old Fashioned cocktail, muddling sugar is often the standard practice. However, if only syrup
is available, the agent should adapt its pre-set actions to prevent repeated failures despite being
competent to accomplish the task.
To solve these issues, we conduct an extensive exploration of action learning in LLM agents. We
introduce a framework LearnAct, designed to generate and optimize new action types as APIs dynam-
ically. The newly generated action types are in the form of Python functions, leveraging the LLM’s
extensive prior knowledge and code generation ability to devise a diverse and representative action
space. Furthermore, LearnAct stands out due to its iterative learning strategy, which continuously
refines actions through a feedback loop. In each cycle, the LLM evaluates the effectiveness of current
actions using training examples, identifying and rectifying errors in failed instances. The learning
strategy progressively deepens task understanding and improves learnable actions.
Our experimental results demonstrate that this method of iterative refinement not only creates complex
and user-friendly action types but also achieves more effective and efficient learning compared to
previous state-of-the-art methods such as Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023). By learning on a few problem
instances, LearnAct can generalize to a general type of task with strong performance. In summary,
our contributions are as follows.

       • We propose the action learning framework by generating and updating learnable actions,
         enabling learning customized action space that better fits the LLM’s planning capacity.
       • To implement the action learning framework, our method LearnAct employs Python func-
         tions to generate new actions, enabling flexible definitions of action types. Our iterative
         learning strategy incorporates LLM to autonomously refine and updates the currently avail-
         able actions based on errors in failed tasks.
       • Our experimental results demonstrate that LearnAct effectively learns action spaces within
         a few trials, acquiring transferable capabilities in diverse environments. Through action
         learning, LearnAct outperforms SOTA agents by a significant margin, showcasing the
         potential of action learning for LLM agents.


                                                                                                         2
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




2     Related Work

LLM Agent Learning Recent research has advanced the use of large language models (LLMs) in
embodied agents (Duan et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022a; Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Yao
et al., 2023a; Park et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2023;
Qiao et al., 2023; Stengel-Eskin et al., 2024). These methods differ from previous reasoning-centered
methods like Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023b) as they iteratively incorporate environment feedback to modify subsequent plans. This
closed-loop process is centered on the ability of LLM agents to learn from environment.
The majority of previous work on multi-turn reflection concentrates on learning from environment
feedback within the same problem (Lai et al., 2023; Le et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Liu & Abbeel,
2023; Singh et al., 2023). ReAct (Yao et al., 2023a) propose a basic framework for using thought
to enforce the LLM reflect on previous behaviors within the same trial. Reflexion (Shinn et al.,
2023; Park et al., 2023), on the other hand, uses a multi-trial approach to perform reflection. By
summarizing historical experiences and identifying reasons for failure, LLM is prompted to generate
insights for more effective agent instruction. Similarly, ExpeL (Zhao et al., 2023) facilitates a general
learning system that extracts insights and past experiences with retrieval. Retroformer (Yao et al.,
2023b) propels introduce prompt-based training to enhance LLM reflections.
Our method differs from this line of work in two points (1) LearnAct performs direct learning in
the action space, which substantially improves the reliability and utility of generated actions. (2)
LearnAct does not target a single problem instance but learns experience from a few training instances
and is tested on a general type of task. A more detailed comparison is provided in Table 1.
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning LearnAct generates new action types based on atomic
actions to enable more informative and applicable actions, similar to the approach in hierarchical
reinforcement learning (Erol et al., 1994; Kulkarni et al., 2016; Bacon et al., 2017), where a high-level
executor plan with high-level action types, and then executes the seed actions according to the
high-level plan (Yao et al., 2023a; Sharma et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a; Sun et al., 2023). Our
approach also differs from hierarchical reinforcement learning by not only using code-based action
space, providing stronger capacity due to the code statements such as conditions and loops (Cai et al.,
2023; Qian et al., 2023), but also avoiding the typical imposition of a strict two-level structure, using
flexible mixed-level actions instead.
Table 1: The comparison of our method and other open action agents. !Voyager used a curriculum
                                                                              –
learning pipeline tailored for Minedojo to learn new actions.

                       Closed Loop     Action Type          Learnable    Transferable    Learnable Module
    ReAct              ✔               Natural language     ✗            -               -
    ReAct+Reflexion    ✔               Natural language     ✔            ✗               Policy
    CodeAsPolicy       ✗               Code                 ✗            -               -
                                                            !
                                                            –
    Voyager            ✔               Code                              ✔               Action
    LearnAct           ✔               Code                 ✔            ✔               Action


3     Problem Statement

The task of a language agent can be succinctly modeled as a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP), which is defined by a tuple ⟨S , O , A, T , R⟩, with S representing the set of all
possible states, O being the observation space through which the agent perceives the state, A denoting
the action space, T : S × A → S being the state transition function, and R : S × A → {0, 1}
being the reward function.
At step t, the language agent G takes an action step at based on policy π (policy prompt), problem E
(problem instructions), and previous observation-action trajectory ht = [o1 , a1 , . . . , ot−1 , at−1 , ot ],
                                             at = G (π, E , ht )                                           (1)
π, E , and ht correspond to the instruction, goal, and history in Figure 1 (right), respectively. Action
at is successfully grounded (executable) only if it is within the action space, i.e. at ∈ A. Even
successfully grounded action may be invalid due to unmet conditions or has no effect in the current


                                                      3
