                                        Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




                                        A Reparameterized Discrete Diffusion Model for Text Gener-
                                        ation

                                            Lin Zheng1 Jianbo Yuan2 Lei Yu3 Lingpeng Kong1
                                            1 The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Google DeepMind
                                            lzheng2@cs.hku.hk



                                                                                   Abstract




arXiv:2302.05737v3 [cs.CL] 2 Aug 2024
                                                 This work studies discrete diffusion probabilistic models with applications
                                                 to natural language generation. We derive an alternative yet equivalent
                                                 formulation of the sampling from discrete diffusion processes and leverage
                                                 this insight to develop a family of reparameterized discrete diffusion models.
                                                 The derived generic framework is highly flexible, offers a fresh perspec-
                                                 tive of the generation process in discrete diffusion models, and features
                                                 more effective training and decoding techniques. We conduct extensive
                                                 experiments to evaluate the text generation capability of our model, demon-
                                                 strating significant improvements over existing diffusion models.



                                        1     Introduction

                                        Diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
                                        2021b), or diffusion models for short, have achieved remarkable progress and shown great
                                        success in generating high-quality and photo-realistic images (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia
                                        et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Balaji et al., 2022; Peebles & Xie, 2022). Researchers
                                        have successfully extended diffusion models to various data modalities beyond 2D images,
                                        including audio (Kong et al., 2021), video (Ho et al., 2022), as well as molecule generation
                                        (Hoogeboom et al., 2022b; Jo et al., 2022). There has also been a surge of interest in extending
                                        diffusion models to natural languages (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al.,
                                        2022b; Dieleman et al., 2022). Diffusion-based language models are appealing in that the
                                        generation process is typically conducted in a non-autoregressive manner, which features
                                        in-parallel decoding by design and potentially a faster runtime (Hoogeboom et al., 2021;
                                        Austin et al., 2021). In addition, due to the iterative reconstruction process in diffusion-
                                        based models, it is often possible to refine the previously generated texts (Savinov et al.,
                                        2022). As a result, compared with the conventional auto-regressive models, diffusion-based
                                        language models are more flexible and attain better trade-offs between generation quality
                                        and efficiency.
                                        However, there are noticeably fewer success cases in employing diffusion models for large-
                                        scale text generation tasks. This is possibly due to the discrete nature of natural languages,
                                        while most conventional diffusion models focus on continuous-valued contents. To bridge
                                        the discrepancy, a recent line of work suggests conducting continuous diffusion processes
                                        over token embeddings (Li et al., 2022b; Gong et al., 2022; Strudel et al., 2022; Dieleman et al.,
                                        2022) or logits (Han et al., 2022; Richemond et al., 2022). Nevertheless, these approaches
                                        often require designing a well-crafted rounding scheme to convert the diffused continuous
                                        vectors to the actual discrete tokens. In addition, existing continuous diffusion models
                                        often require a large number of sampling iterations to achieve the desired performance.
                                        This issue is exacerbated in the case of modeling texts, as the diffusing steps over text
                                        embeddings are hard to be translated to significant movements of token states due to the
                                        rounding quantization. This results in a considerably slower runtime than auto-regressive
                                        models. For example, a recent continuous text diffusion model (DiffuSeq; Gong et al.,
                                        2022) runs several orders of magnitude slower than the auto-regressive baseline of a similar
                                        scale, as shown in Figure 2b. Different from the above, another research direction focuses
                                        on diffusion processes that directly operate on discrete state spaces (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,


                                                                                        1
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




2015; Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021, see §2). However, they are relatively
under-explored and often achieve inferior results in text generation.
In this work, we demonstrate that discrete diffusion
models can serve as strong baselines for text generation.
By re-examining the formulation, we observe that sam-        x0       x1         x2         x3
pling from discrete diffusion models admits a novel yet
equivalent reparameterization (§3). Specifically, starting (a) Conventional discrete diffusion.
with a completely noisy sequence, the sampling pro-
cedure in a discrete diffusion model is equivalent to                  v1        v2        v3
the following route-and-denoise process where at each
iteration, each token within the sequence is either de-
noised or reset to noisy states according to an under-
                                                              x0       x1        x2        x3
lying stochastic routing mechanism (§3.2). The router
assigns the same probability to the decision for each
token, processing the sequence in a uniform manner. (b) Reparameterized discrete diffusion.
Based on this insight, we propose Reparameterized
Discrete diffusion Models (RDMs; Figure 1), a new fam- Figure 1: Graphical models of
ily of models that respects the reparameterization and backward diffusion processes.
formulates the routing process explicitly. RDMs enjoy
appealing properties for both training (§4.2) and sampling (§4.3): (1) Simplified training.
We demonstrate that the training objective for RDMs can be reduced to a re-weighted
standard cross-entropy loss. Furthermore, the loss objective is invariant to different routing
probabilities up to reweighting, indicating that the large family of RDMs with distinct
routing processes can be trained with the same surrogate objective; (2) Flexible sampling.
The shared training objective makes sampling highly flexible and allows more expressive
routing processes. In particular, we develop an adaptive routing strategy that routes tokens
to the denoised state only if the router outputs high scores instead of uniformly process-
ing all the tokens. Equipped with such training and decoding schemes, we demonstrate
that RDMs significantly improve vanilla discrete diffusion models across several standard
text generation benchmarks (§5). They also achieve much better performance than the
continuous diffusion models while running several orders faster.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

• We analyze existing discrete diffusion probabilistic models and derive a more compact
  formulation that generalizes various diffusion processes and reveals an internal routing
  mechanism for selectively denoising tokens;
• We introduce reparameterized diffusion models (RDMs), a new model family that param-
  eterizes both routing and denoising processes. RDMs yield a greatly simplified training
  objective and enable more flexible decoding algorithms for text generation;
• We provide extensive results and analyses across several benchmarks to demonstrate the
  improved text generation quality of RDMs.


2   Background

Let x0 ∼ pdata ( x0 ) denote a discrete random variable with K possible outcomes. To ease
notation, we represent discrete variables as one-hot vectors in {0, 1}K , which is 0 everywhere
except that the entry corresponding to the current state is 1. Discrete diffusion probabilistic
models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021) are usually
defined as a class of latent variable models characterized by a forward and backward pro-
cess. The forward process gradually transforms input data to some noise distribution qnoise
through T intermediate latent variables x1 , . . . , x T ∈ {0, 1}K , with the forward transition
q( xt | xt−1 ) = β t xt−1 + (1 − β t )qnoise . In this case, the distribution q( xt | x0 ) is available in
closed form,
                                 q( xt | x0 ) = αt xt−1 + (1 − αt )qnoise ,                            (1)
where αt := ∏it=1 β i is specified to decrease from 1 to 0 w.r.t. t. qnoise characterizes different
diffusion processes; for example, multinomial diffusion (Hoogeboom et al., 2021) adopts


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024




a uniform noise distribution over the vocabulary {1, 2, . . . , K }; alternatively, absorbing
diffusion specifies qnoise to be a point mass with all of the probability on an absorbing state
(Austin et al., 2021).
The backward process q( xt−1 | xt ) is the key ingredient for diffusion-based generative mod-
eling, based on which we can start with unstructured noise x T ∼ qnoise and perform
ancestral sampling xt−1 ∼ q( xt−1 | xt ) to obtain new draws from pdata ( x0 ). Unfortu-
nately, the backward transition q( xt−1 | xt ) is mostly intractable due to the marginaliza-
tion over the entire data distribution. Therefore, we resort to approximating it with a
parameterized distribution pθ ( xt−1 | xt ) at each step t. This results in a generative model
pθ ( x0 , x1 , . . . , x T ) = pθ ( x T ) ∏tT=1 pθ ( xt−1 | xt ), which can be trained by maximizing the evi-
dence lower bound (ELBO) of log pθ ( x0 ),
                                                             T
                                log pθ ( x0 ) ≥ L1 (θ) − ∑ Lt (θ) + const.,
                                                            t =2

with Lt (θ) := Eq( xt | x0 ) [KL(q( xt−1 | xt , x0 ) ∥ pθ ( xt−1 | xt ))]. For the case t = 1, we have
L1 (θ) := Eq(x1 | x0 ) [log pθ ( x0 | x1 )]. The ELBO decomposes into a sum of KL divergences
between the conditional backward transition q( xt−1 | xt , x0 ) and pθ ( xt−1 | xt ) at each time step
t. Note that q( xt−1 | xt , x0 ) ∝ q( xt | xt−1 )q( xt−1 | x0 ) can be calculated analytically for most
discrete diffusion models. To define the distribution pθ ( xt−1 | xt ), previous work (Hooge-
boom et al., 2021) suggests that it can be parameterized similarly to q( xt−1 | xt , x0 ) by letting
pθ ( xt−1 | xt ) = q( xt−1 | xt , f ( xt ; θ)), where a neural network f ( xt ; θ) is adopted to predict
x0 . Typically f ( xt ; θ) ∈ (0, 1)K is the model output normalized by a softmax function,
representing the probability vector for each token. For text generation, each discrete text
token within an input sequence is often assumed to be diffused independently. Thus to
avoid cluttering the discussion, we focus initially on the diffusion process of a single token
and address the entire sequence later in §4.2 and §4.3. A more detailed discussion about the
related work and derivations about discrete diffusion models are provided in Appendices A
and B, respectively.

3     Reparameterizing the Backward Processes

This section presents an in-depth study of discrete diffusion probabilistic models. We derive
an alternative formulation for the backward process (§3.1) and devise a reparameterized
sampling scheme (§3.2), which paves the way for a more generic family of discrete diffusion
models (§4).

3.1   An Alternative Backward Formulation

We first elaborate on how the conditional backward transition of existing discrete diffusion
models can be written in a more compact formulation (see Appendix C for the proof).
Proposition 3.1. Let the forward transition of discrete diffusion be q( xt | xt−1 ) = β t xt−1 + (1 −
β t )qnoise . Then the conditional backward transition q( xt−1 | xt , x0 ) can be equivalently written as
                                                                 
                                             λ(1) xt + 1 − λ(1) qnoise ,       if xt = x0
                                                t −1         t −1 
                  q ( x t −1 | x t , x 0 ) =    ( 2 )
                                                       
                                                             ( 2 )                                      (2)
                                              λ x0 + 1 − λ                     if xt ̸= x0 .
                                                t −1         t−1 qnoise ( xt ),

Here qnoise ( xt ) = β t xt + (1 − β t )qnoise denotes a noise distribution that interpolates between xt
               (1)           (1− β t )(1−αt−1 )qnoise (u= xt )        (2)    α −α
and qnoise , λt−1 := 1 − α +(          1−αt )qnoise (u= xt )
                                                               , and λt−1 := t1−−1 αt t , where qnoise (u = xt ) is
                                 t
the probability of the noise equal to xt .

Intuitively, Equation 2 reveals that the main mechanism of the backward process is to shuttle
discrete tokens between fully noisy states and the ground truth state x0 , conditioned on
the equality of xt and x0 . If xt = x0 , the current token state is possibly noise-free, and the
model either remains noise-free by copying the state xt−1 ← xt , or resets the state to the


                                                        3
