                                                        DyNet: The Dynamic Neural Network Toolkit
                                                  Graham Neubig∗†, Chris Dyer‡, Yoav Goldberg§, Austin Matthews∗,
                                            Waleed Ammar¶, Antonios Anastasopoulos‖, Miguel Ballesteros∗∗, David Chiang‖,
                                                   Daniel Clothiaux∗, Trevor Cohn††, Kevin Duh‡‡, Manaal Faruqui§§,
                                           Cynthia Gan¶¶
                                                       , Dan Garrette§§
                                                                      , Yangfeng Ji∗∗∗
                                                                                     , Lingpeng Kong∗, Adhiguna Kuncoro∗,




arXiv:1701.03980v1 [stat.ML] 15 Jan 2017
                                                   Gaurav Kumar, Chaitanya Malaviya∗, Paul Michel∗, Yusuke Oda†,
                                                                 ‡‡

                                             Matthew Richardson†††
                                                                 , Naomi Saphra‡‡‡
                                                                                 , Swabha Swayamdipta∗, Pengcheng Yin∗



                                                                                         Abstract
                                                    We describe DyNet, a toolkit for implementing neural network models based on dy-
                                                namic declaration of network structure. In the static declaration strategy that is used in
                                                toolkits like Theano, CNTK, and TensorFlow, the user first defines a computation graph
                                                (a symbolic representation of the computation), and then examples are fed into an engine
                                                that executes this computation and computes its derivatives. In DyNet’s dynamic dec-
                                                laration strategy, computation graph construction is mostly transparent, being implicitly
                                                constructed by executing procedural code that computes the network outputs, and the
                                                user is free to use different network structures for each input. Dynamic declaration thus
                                                facilitates the implementation of more complicated network architectures, and DyNet is
                                                specifically designed to allow users to implement their models in a way that is idiomatic
                                                in their preferred programming language (C++ or Python). One challenge with dynamic
                                                declaration is that because the symbolic computation graph is defined anew for every
                                                training example, its construction must have low overhead. To achieve this, DyNet has
                                                an optimized C++ backend and lightweight graph representation. Experiments show that
                                                DyNet’s speeds are faster than or comparable with static declaration toolkits, and signifi-
                                                cantly faster than Chainer, another dynamic declaration toolkit. DyNet is released open-
                                                source under the Apache 2.0 license, and available at http://github.com/clab/dynet.
                                            ∗
                                                Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
                                            †
                                                Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan
                                              ‡
                                                DeepMind, London, UK
                                              §
                                                Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
                                              ¶
                                                Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, USA
                                              ‖
                                                University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
                                            ∗∗
                                                IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
                                             ††
                                                University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
                                             ‡‡
                                                Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
                                             §§
                                                Google, New York, NY, USA
                                            ¶¶
                                                Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
                                           ∗∗∗
                                                University of Washington, Seattle, USA
                                           †††
                                                Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
                                           ‡‡‡
                                                University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK




                                                                                              1
1    Introduction
Deep neural networks are now an indispensable tool in the machine learning practitioner’s
toolbox, powering applications from image understanding [39], speech recognition and syn-
thesis [29, 65], game playing [45, 54], language modeling and analysis [6, 14], and more.
To a first approximation, deep learning replaces the application-specific feature engineering
(coupled with well-understood models) that is characteristic of classical “shallow” learning
paradigms with application-specific model engineering (usually coupled with less sophisticated
features of the inputs). The deep learning paradigm therefore entails ongoing development
of new model variants. While developing effective models requires insight and analysis, it
also requires implementing new models and assessing their performance on real tasks. Thus,
rapid prototyping and easy maintenance of efficient and correct model code is of paramount
importance in deep learning.
     Deep learning models operate in two modes: they either compute a prediction (or distri-
bution over predictions) given an input, or, at training time when supervision is available,
they compute the derivatives of a prediction error “loss” with respect to model parameters
which are used to minimize subsequent errors on similar inputs using some variant of gradi-
ent descent. Since implementing a model requires both implementing the code that executes
the model predictions as well as the code that carries out gradient computation and learn-
ing, model development is a nontrivial engineering challenge. The difficulty of this challenge
can be reduced by using tools that simplify implementation of neural network computations.
These tools, including Theano [7], TensorFlow [1], Torch [13], CNTK [64], MxNet [10], and
Chainer [62] provide neural network function primitives (e.g., linear algebra operations, non-
linear transformations, etc.), parameter initialization and optimization routines, and usually
the ability to express composite computations of a task-specific prediction and error that are
then differentiated automatically to obtain the gradients needed to drive learning algorithms.
This last automatic differentiation (autodiff) component is arguably their most important
labor-saving feature since changes to the function that computes the loss for a training input
will require a corresponding change in the computation of its derivative. If an engineer main-
tains these code paths independently, it is easy for them to get out of sync. Furthermore, since
the differentiation of composite expressions is algorithmically straightforward [63, 31], there
is little downside to using autodiff algorithms in place of hand-written code for computing
derivatives.
     In short, these tools have made deep learning successful because they have effectively solved
a crucial software engineering problem. The question remains though: since engineering is
a key component of deep learning practice, what engineering problems are existing tools
failing to solve? Do they let programmers express themselves naturally? Do they facilitate
debugging? Do they facilitate the maintenance of large-scale projects?
     In this paper, we suggest that the programming model that underlies several popular
toolkits—namely a separation of declaration and execution of the network architecture (which
we refer to as static declaration)—is necessarily associated with some serious software engi-
neering risks, particularly when dealing with dynamically structured network architectures
(e.g., sequences of variable lengths and tree-structured recursive neural networks). As an al-
ternative, we propose as reviving an alternative programming model found in autodiff libraries
that unifies declaration and execution.
     As a proof of concept of our recommended programming model, we describe “DyNet: The


                                                2
Dynamic Neural Network Toolkit,” a toolkit based on a unified declaration and execution
programming model which we call dynamic declaration.1
    In a series of case-studies in a single-machine environment,2 we show that DyNet obtains
execution efficiency that is comparable to static declaration toolkits for standard model ar-
chitectures. For models that use dynamic architectures (e.g., where every training instance
has a different model architecture), implementation is significantly simplified.


2     Static Declaration vs. Dynamic Declaration
In this section, we describe in more concrete terms the two paradigms of static declara-
tion (§2.1) and dynamic declaration (§2.2) .

2.1    Static Declaration
Programs written in the static declaration paradigm (which is used by TensorFlow, Theano,
and CNTK, among others) follow a two step process:

Definition of a computational architecture: The user writes a program that defines the
     “shape” of the computation they wish to perform. This computation is generally rep-
     resented as a computation graph, which is a symbolic representation of a complex com-
     putation that can both be executed and differentiated using autodiff algorithms. For
     example, a user might define computation that performs image recognition such as:
     “Take a 64x64 image represented as a matrix of brightness values, perform two layers of
     convolutions, predict the class of the image out of 100 classes, and optionally calculate
     the loss with respect to the correct label.”

Execution of the computation: The user then repeatedly populates the 64x64 matrix
    with data and the library executes the previously declared computation graph. The
    predictions can then be used at test time, or at training time the loss can be calcu-
    lated and back-propagated through the graph to compute the gradients required for
    parameter updates.

Static declaration has a number of advantages, the most significant of which is that after the
computation graph is defined, it can be optimized in a number of ways so that the subsequent
repeated executions of computation can be performed as quickly as possible, speeding training
and test over large datasets. Second, the static computation graph can be used to schedule
computation across a pool of computational devices [1]. Third, the static declaration paradigm
benefits the toolkit designer: less efficient algorithms for graph construction and optimization
can be used since this one-time cost will be amortized across many training instances at run
time. These advantages are the reason why many popular libraries take this static declaration
approach.
    1
      Available open-source under the Apache license at https://github.com/clab/dynet and documented at
https://dynet.readthedocs.io.
    2
      Static declaration facilitates algorithmic distribution of computation across multiple devices, but our
focus is in this paper is on the engineering challenges associated with rapid model prototyping. We discuss
static declaration’s benefits with respect to scalability below, and we will return to the outlook for automatic
distribution of dynamic computation across multiple devices in the conclusion.



                                                       3
