                                                            An Empirical Comparison of Parsing Methods
                                                                    for Stanford Dependencies
                                                                             Lingpeng Kong Noah A. Smith
                                                                              Language Technologies Institute




arXiv:1404.4314v1 [cs.CL] 16 Apr 2014
                                                                                Carnegie Mellon University
                                                                                Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
                                                                          {lingpenk,nasmith}@cs.cmu.edu


                                                                                                Abstract
                                                    Stanford typed dependencies are a widely desired representation of natural language sentences, but
                                                parsing is one of the major computational bottlenecks in text analysis systems. In light of the evolving
                                                definition of the Stanford dependencies and developments in statistical dependency parsing algorithms,
                                                this paper revisits the question of Cer et al. (2010): what is the tradeoff between accuracy and speed in
                                                obtaining Stanford dependencies in particular? We also explore the effects of input representations on
                                                this tradeoff: part-of-speech tags, the novel use of an alternative dependency representation as input, and
                                                distributional representaions of words. We find that direct dependency parsing is a more viable solution
                                                than it was found to be in the past. An accompanying software release can be found at:
                                                http://www.ark.cs.cmu.edu/TBSD


                                        1 Introduction
                                        The Stanford typed dependency (SD) representations of grammatical relations, introduced by de Marneffe and Manning
                                        (2008), have become a popular text analysis scheme for a variety of NLP applications such as event ex-
                                        traction (Björne et al., 2009), error correction (Tetreault et al., 2010), and machine translation (Stein et al.,
                                        2010). Relative to other dependency representations, such as those of Yamada and Matsumoto (YM; 2003),
                                        SD parses emphasize semantic relations (e.g., relative clauses are rooted in the verb rather than the com-
                                        plementizer, prepositional phrases in the nominal rather than the preposition). This may contribute to their
                                        attractiveness in downstream applications (Elming et al., 2013), but it also makes SD parsing more chal-
                                        lenging than YM parsing.
                                             Broadly speaking, there are two kinds of approaches to obtaining dependencies. One, which we call
                                        c-parsing, applies phrase-structure parsing algorithms to obtain constituents, then extracts dependencies by
                                        applying expert-crafted head rules and perhaps other transformations. This is the dominant approach for SD
                                        parsing; indeed, the rules1 are considered definitive for the representation, and they are updated frequently.
                                             The second approach, which we call d-parsing, applies dependency parsing algorithms, directly tack-
                                        ling the grammatical relations without representing constituents. These parsers tend to be faster, and for
                                        YM dependencies they achieve the best performance: Martins et al. (2013) report 93.1% unlabeled at-
                                        tachment score on PTB §23, while a state-of-the-art phrase-structure parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005;
                                          1
                                              http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/corenlp.shtml




                                                                                                    1
McClosky et al., 2006) achieves 92.5%. Several recent dependency parsers (Rush and Petrov, 2012; Choi and McCallum,
2013; Zhang et al., 2013) further improve the speed of this approach while preserving accuracy.
    The main contribution of this paper is an empirical comparison of a wide range of different ways to ob-
tain SD parses. It follows on an important study by Cer et al. (2010), which found a 6.9% absolute unlabeled
(8% absolute labeled) point gap in F1 between c-parsing with the best available phrase-structure parser and
d-parsing with the best available dependency parser in SD parsing for CC PROCESSED dependencies (the
most linguistically rich representation). Çetinoğlu et al. (2010) explored similar strategies for parsing into
lexical-functional grammar representations without phrase-structure parsing.
    Since those studies, dependency parsing has advanced, and the definition of SDs has evolved consid-
erably, so it is worth revisiting the viability of d-parsing for Stanford typed dependencies. For Chinese,
Che et al. (2012) found greater success with a second-order dependency parser, Mate (Bohnet, 2010).
    This paper’s contributions are:
   • We quantify the current tradeoff between accuracy and speed in SD parsing, notably closing the gap
     between c-parsing and d-parsing to 1.8% absolute unlabeled (2.0% absolute labeled) F1 points (§3)
     for CC PROCESSED SD parsing. The current gap is 30% (25%) the size of the one found by Cer et al.
     (2010). An arc-factored d-parser is shown to perform a bit better than the Stanford CoreNLP pipeline,
     at twenty times the speed.

   • We quantify the effect of part-of-speech tagging on SD parsing performance, isolating POS errors as
     a major cause of that gap (§4).

   • We demonstrate the usefulness of the YM representation as a source of information for SD parsing,
     in a stacking framework (§5).

   • Noting recently attested benefits of distributional word representations in parsing (Koo et al., 2008),
     we find that d-parsing augmented with Brown cluster features performs similarly to c-parsing with
     the Stanford recursive neural network parser (Socher et al., 2013), at three times the speed.


2 Background and Methods
A Stanford dependency graph consists of a set of ordered dependency tuples hT, P, Ci, where T is the type
of the dependency and P and C are parent and child word tokens, respectively. These graphs were designed
to be generated from the phrase-structure tree of a sentence (de Marneffe et al., 2006). This transformation
happens in several stages. First, head rules are used to extract parent-child pairs from a phrase-structure
parse. Second, each dependency is labeled with a grammatical relation type, using the most specific match-
ing pattern from an expert-crafted set.
     There are several SD conventions. The simplest, BASIC SD graphs, are always trees. Additional rules
can be applied to a phrase-structure tree to identify E XTRA depenencies (e.g., ref arcs attaching a rela-
tivizer like which to the head of the NP modified by a relative clause), and then to collapse dependencies
involving transitions and propagate conjunct dependencies, giving the richest convention, CC PROCESSED.
In this paper we measure performance first on BASIC dependencies; in §3.2 we show that the quality of
CC PROCESSED dependencies tends to improve as BASIC dependencies improve.
     The procedures for c-parsing and d-parsing are well-established (Cer et al., 2010); we briefly review
them. In c-parsing, a phrase-structure parser is applied, after which the Stanford CoreNLP rules are applied
to obtain the SD graph. In this work, we use the latest version available at this writing, which is version
3.3.0. In d-parsing, a statistical dependency parsing model is applied to the sentence; these models are

                                                     2
trained on Penn Treebank trees (§02–21) transformed into BASIC dependency trees using the Stanford rules.
To obtain CC PROCESSED graphs, E XTRA dependencies must be added using rules, then the collapsing and
propagation transformations must be applied.
    One important change in the Stanford dependencies since Cer et al. (2010) conducted their study is the
introduction of rules to infer E XTRA dependencies from the phrase-structure tree. (Cer et al. used version
1.6.2; we use 3.3.0.) We found that, given perfect BASIC dependencies (but no phrase-structure tree), the
inability to apply such inference rules accounts for a 0.6% absolute gap in unlabeled F1 (0.5% labeled)
between c-parsing and d-parsing for CC PROCESSED dependencies (version 1.6.2).2


3 Current Tradeoffs
We measure the performance of different c-parsing and d-parsing methods in terms of unlabeled and labeled
attachment score (UAS and LAS, respectively) on Penn Treebank §22 and §23. We report parsing speeds
on a Lenovo ThinkCentre desktop computer with Core i7-3770 3.4GHz 8M cache CPU and 32GB memory.
All parsers were trained using Penn Treebank §02–21. We target version 3.3.0 of SDs (released November
12, 2013), and, where Stanford CoreNLP components are used, they are the same version.
    We consider three c-parsing methods:

   1. The Stanford “englishPCFG” parser, version 3.3.0 (Klein and Manning, 2003), which we believe is
      the most widely used pipeline for SD parsing. This model uses additional non-WSJ training data for
      their English parsing model.3

   2. The Stanford “RNN” parser, version 3.3.0 (Socher et al., 2013), which combines PCFGs with a syn-
      tactically untied recursive neural network that learns syntactic/semantic compositional vector repre-
      sentations. Note this model uses distributional representations from external corpus; see section 5.1.

   3. The Berkeley “Aug10(eng sm6.gr)” parser, version 1.7 (Petrov et al., 2006).

   4. Charniak and Johnson’s “June06(CJ)” parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005; McClosky et al., 2006).
      Note this is the self-trained model which uses 2 million unlabeled sentences from the North American
      News Text corpus, NANC (Graff, 1995). It is therefore technically semi-supervised.

Each of these parsers performs its own POS tagging. Runtime measurements for these parsers include POS
tagging and also conversion to SD graphs.
    We consider eight d-parsing methods:

   4. MaltParser liblinear stackproj (Nivre et al., 2006) a transition-based dependency parser that uses the
      Stack-Projective algorithm. The transitions are essentially the same as in the “arc-standard” version of
      Nivre’s algorithm and produce only projective dependency trees (Nivre, 2009; Nivre et al., 2009). In
      learning, it uses the LIBLINEAR package implemented by Fan et al. (2008). This is the same setting
      as the most popular pre-trained model provided by MaltParser.
   2
     In version 3.3.0, inference rules have been added to the Stanford CoreNLP package to convert from BASIC to CC PROCESSED
without a phrase-structure tree. Given perfect BASIC dependencies, there is still a 0.2% unlabeled (0.3% labeled) gap in F1 in PTB
§22 (0.4% and 0.5% for §23). We added some new rules to help close this gap by about 0.1 F1 (unlabeled and labeled), but more
can be done. The new rules are not fine-tuned to §22–23; they are given in Appendix A.
   3
     See the Stanford Parser FAQ at http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/parser-faq.shtml.




                                                                3
