                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




                                         L EMUR : H ARMONIZING NATURAL L ANGUAGE AND
                                         C ODE FOR L ANGUAGE AGENTS
                                                              ∗♠♢              ∗♠♢                ∗♣          ♠♢            ♡♢              △
                                             Yiheng Xu      Hongjin Su       Chen Xing      Boyu Mi       Qian Liu     Weijia Shi
                                                     ♢            ♠♢          ♠♢               ♠♢                  ♠♢             ♠♢
                                          Binyuan Hui Fan Zhou Yitao Liu Tianbao Xie Zhoujun Cheng Siheng Zhao
                                                                        ♠               ★                 ♣        ♠♢
                                                        Lingpeng Kong Bailin Wang Caiming Xiong Tao Yu
                                                      ♠                            ♢               ♣
                                                        University of Hong Kong      XLang Lab       Salesforce Research
                                                         ♡                 △                          ★
                                                           Sea AI Lab        University of Washington MIT CSAIL
                                              ♠                                     ♣




arXiv:2310.06830v2 [cs.CL] 24 Aug 2024
                                                {yhxu,hjsu,tyu}@cs.hku.hk {cxing, cxiong}@salesforce.com



                                                                                        A BSTRACT

                                                      We introduce Lemur and Lemur-Chat, openly accessible language models op-
                                                      timized for both natural language and coding capabilities to serve as the back-
                                                      bone of versatile language agents. The evolution from language chat models to
                                                      functional language agents demands that models not only master human inter-
                                                      action, reasoning, and planning but also ensure grounding in the relevant envi-
                                                      ronments. This calls for a harmonious blend of language and coding capabil-
                                                      ities in the models. Lemur and Lemur-Chat are proposed to address this ne-
                                                      cessity, demonstrating balanced proficiencies in both domains, unlike existing
                                                      open-source models that tend to specialize in either. Through meticulous pre-
                                                      training using a code-intensive corpus and instruction fine-tuning on text and code
                                                      data, our models achieve state-of-the-art averaged performance across diverse
                                                      text and coding benchmarks. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate Lemur’s
                                                      superiority over existing open-source models and its proficiency across various
                                                      agent tasks involving human communication, tool usage, and interaction under
                                                      fully- and partially- observable environments. The harmonization between natu-
                                                      ral and programming languages enables Lemur-Chat to significantly narrow the
                                                      gap with proprietary models on agent abilities, providing key insights into devel-
                                                      oping advanced open-source agents adept at reasoning, planning, and operating
                                                      seamlessly across environments. Our model and code have been open-sourced at
                                                      https://github.com/OpenLemur/Lemur.


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION
                                         Intelligent agents are broadly conceptualized as autonomous problem solvers with the abilities to
                                         sense their environment, decide, and act upon that enviorment (Sutton & Barto, 2005; Russell, 2010;
                                         Wilkins, 2014). Recent implementations of this concept in creating language agents (Yao et al.,
                                         2022b; Gravitas, 2023; Wang et al., 2023a) capable of utilizing natural language for varied and
                                         intricate tasks in diverse environments have demonstrated potential, particularly when built upon
                                         large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
                                         OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a). Such agents harness the human knowledge in LLMs and
                                         can think and communicate in human terms. This equips them to employ varied tools, operate in
                                         complex environments, engage in language reasoning, and create spontaneous multi-agent systems.
                                         To effectively form the foundation of language agents, LLMs should not only master human inter-
                                         action, reasoning, and planning but also ensure grounding in the relevant environments (Wei et al.,
                                         2022; Huang et al., 2022a; Ichter et al., 2022). Human interaction, reasoning, and planning can be
                                         largely realized through the natural language capabilities of LLMs. On the other hand, the grounded
                                         execution in the environment is usually achieved by using general-purpose code or domain-specific
                                         APIs, such as controlling web browsers (Shi et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2022a; Deng et al., 2023; Zhou
                                             ∗
                                                 Equal contribution.


                                                                                              1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




et al., 2023), interacting with OS CLI terminals (Yang et al., 2023), and manipulating robotic arms
via primitive APIs (Ichter et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Liang et al., 2023). Therefore, we posit
that for the construction of language agents, it is imperative for language models to possess har-
monized capabilities in both natural language and programming languages. This balance ensures
that models do not specialize exclusively in certain areas but can seamlessly integrate with envi-
ronment contexts and generate controllable and valid actions. Presently, closed-source models like
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) demonstrate such capabilities, which empower them to function as language
agents. However, current open-source LLMs such as Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023a) and CodeL-
lama (Rozière et al., 2023) have traditionally been tailored for either textual or code-related tasks,
with limited ability to effectively balance both.
To address this need, we introduce Lemur and Lemur-Chat, cutting-edge, openly accessible models
pre-trained and fine-tuned to harmonize text and code capabilities. We enhanced the base Llama-
2-70B through thoughtfully designed pre-training and instruction fine-tuning stages. Specifically,
we built a code-centric corpus based on The Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022), comprising 90B tokens
with a 10:1 code-to-text ratio, ensuring improved capabilities in coding ability while maintaining
performance in natural language ability. We refer to this model as Lemur. After pretraining, we
conducted instruction fine-tuning using about 300K examples from both text and code to build an
instruction-following model, which we refer to as Lemur-Chat. Thorough assessments across 8
textual and coding benchmarks validate the superior performance of both Lemur and Lemur-Chat in
multiple text and code evaluations, establishing them as the most well-rounded open-source models.
Moreover, this work embarks on assessing the vital capabilities of language agents across various
scenarios, which we refer to as agent benchmarks. We place a particular emphasis on their tool-
usage abilities, and abilities in grounding in the environment feedback and human feedback. We
also explore the challenges posed by real and partially observable environments where the agent has
to take actions based on limited knowledge and take additional actions to gather more information.
Experimental results indicate that Lemur-Chat outperforms other open-sourced models in 12 of the
13 agent benchmarks. This underscores how the integration of natural and coding capabilities allows
Lemur-Chat to exceed the current open-source models for language agents, markedly bridging the
performance disparity between open-source and commercial alternatives. Our experiments show an
important insight that in agent scenarios, there is a need for synergy between natural language and
coding abilities. Specifically, for models with strong natural language capabilities but weak cod-
ing abilities like Llama-2-70B-Chat, they can effectively use simple tools to assist reasoning
(§4.2) because the action space is small and the difficulty of using tools is low. However, when
facing complex decision-making scenarios such as web browsing and house navigation, the action
space is usually large, and models with strong coding abilities have an advantage in generating com-
plex executable action sequences (§4.5). Moreover, we did error analysis on several environments
covering multiple agent skills to reflect the key challenges for future language agent development,
including tool and action executability §D.1, problem difficulty §D.2, and domain knowledge §D.3.
Overall, Lemur has both strong natural language and coding abilities, enabling it to achieve better
performance in both scenarios. This research provides insights into optimizing the synergy between
natural and programming languages, laying a solid foundation for developing advanced language
agents capable of operating efficiently in various environments.

2     P RE - TRAINING AND I NSTRUCTION TUNING OF L EMUR

This section will introduce the method to build the Lemur and Lemur-Chat models and their per-
formance on commonly-used benchmarks for pre-trained language model evaluation. To build a
more balanced model, the pipeline includes two stages: pre-training (§ 2.1) and instruction fine-
tuning (§ 2.2). The training pipeline is shown in Figure 1.

2.1   P RE - TRAINING

In the pre-training stage, we choose the Llama-2-70B base model as the starting point, which
is the cutting-edge open-sourced base model in most scenarios except the coding scenario. Our
goal is to improve the coding ability while maintaining the reasoning ability of Llama-2. To this
end, we built a corpus with a code-to-text ratio of 10:1. We discuss how we decided this ratio in
§ A.1.2. For the code part, we base it on The Stack (Kocetkov et al., 2022), a collection of source


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




        Llama-2            Code-Centric
                                             Lemur              Supervised
                                                                                    Lemur-Chat
      • Base Model         Pre-training    • Base Model         Fine-tuning         • Chat Model
      • Focus on Natural    + 90B Tokens   • Natural Language   + 300K Examples     • Language Agent
        Language                             & Code


Figure 1: Overview of Training Procedure. We continually pre-train Llama-2-70B model on
90B code-intensive data and fine-tune it with 300K examples of instructions to enable the model to
harmonize natural language and coding abilities.

Table 1: Instruction datasets investigated in this work. We report the average number of rounds
(N̄rounds ), average length of prompts (L̄prompt ), average length of completion (L̄completion ).

Datasets                   Query Source Response Source # Instances N̄rounds L̄prompt L̄completion
Open Assistant 1    Human-written             Human-written     34,546            1.6   34.9     213.1
OpenOrca            Human-written                     GPT-4     200,000           1.0   242.8    174.1
ShareGPT & ChatLogs User prompts              GPT-3.5/GPT-4     81,319            6.0   96.7     340.2
Evol-CodeAlpaca     GPT-3.5/GPT-4             GPT-3.5/GPT-4     51,952            1.0    93.9    343.5



codes from GitHub with permissive licenses. Among all languages, we focus on scripting or in-
terpreted languages (Python, SQL, Bash, Perl, etc.) because agent models are often executed in
interactive scenarios. Unlike compiled languages like C++, the interpreted nature of scripting lan-
guages allows for immediate execution and ease of modification, which is essential for dynamic
interaction in language agent scenarios. As for the text aspect, we use RefinedWeb (Penedo et al.,
2023), Redpajama (Computer, 2023), as well as CommonCrawl, Wikipedia, Books, ArXiv, Stack-
Exchange and DM Mathematics (Saxton et al., 2019) to build the textual data corpus. Following
previous works (Gao et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2022; Computer, 2023; Li et al., 2023), we do
extensive deduplication after aggregating all data sources. The composition of the data is shown
in Appendix § A.1.1. We train the Lemur-70B model initialized with Llama-2-70B using a
TPUv4-512 pod. We train the model with sequence packing (Raffel et al., 2019; Chung et al., 2022)
to improve the training efficiency. Please refer to Appendix § A.1.3 for more details.

2.2     I NSTRUCTION F INE - TUNING

During the instruction fine-tuning phase, we include four data sources to construct Lemur-Chat,
including the Open Assistant crowdsourced annotated dialogue corpus (Köpf et al., 2023), Orca
data with chain of thought reasoning for human-written tasks (Lian et al., 2023; Mukherjee et al.,
2023), ShareGPT & Chatlogs containing real user and ChatGPT history records (ShareGPT data),
as well as Evol-CodeAlpaca data (Luo et al., 2023) consisting of complex coding tasks generated by
ChatGPT along with their solutions. The statistics of these instruction datasets are shown in Table 1.
After we collect these data, we additionally clean and deduplicate these instruction fine-tuning data.
We conduct training on these data for 2 epochs. Please refer to § A.2 for more details.

3     F ROM L ANGUAGE M ODEL TO L ANGUAGE AGENT

This section introduces how we measure the language and coding abilities of a language model to
guide the process of harmonization. We further discuss the new challenges faced when connecting
LLM to the environment and describe how we examine the necessary agent capabilities.

3.1     F UNDAMENTAL L ANGAUGE AND C ODING C APABILITIES

Previous work typically uses a variety of benchmarks to comprehensively reflect the performance of
models on different types of tasks. Therefore, we evaluate the performance of various models across
text and code benchmarks as follows.


                                                   3
