                                                                Statistical Knowledge Assessment
                                                                   for Large Language Models


                                                       Qingxiu Dong1 , Jingjing Xu2 , Lingpeng Kong3 , Zhifang Sui1 and Lei Li4
                                                           1
                                                             National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
                                                                    School of Computer Science, Peking University




arXiv:2305.10519v2 [cs.CL] 28 Oct 2023
                                                    2
                                                      Shanghai AI Lab 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 Carnegie Mellon University
                                             dqx@stu.pku.edu.cn, {jingjingxu, szf}@pku.edu.cn, lpk@cs.hku.hk, leili@cs.cmu.edu



                                                                                          Abstract
                                                      Given varying prompts regarding a factoid question, can a large language model
                                                      (LLM) reliably generate factually correct answers? Existing LLMs may generate
                                                      distinct responses for different prompts. In this paper, we study the problem of
                                                      quantifying knowledge contained in an LLM regarding a given set of facts. We
                                                      propose KaRR, a statistical approach to assess factual knowledge for LLMs. The
                                                      main idea is to estimate the ratio of LLM generating text corresponding to the
                                                      answer entity given diverse prompts of the subject and the querying relation, versus
                                                      it generating by random chances. Our assessment suite contains a comprehensive
                                                      set of 994,123 entities and 600 relations, with 1,395,905 text aliases. We use our
                                                      method to evaluate 20 LLMs of various sizes, including LLaMA, Alpaca, OPT, etc.
                                                      Experiments show that our results have a strong correlation (0.43 Kendall’s τ ) with
                                                      the results of human assessment on LLMs. Our results reveal that the knowledge in
                                                      LLMs with the same backbone architecture adheres to the scaling law, while tuning
                                                      on instruction-following data sometimes compromises the model’s capability to
                                                      generate factually correct text reliably.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance on many tasks including text
                                         generation, question answering, and dialog generation [Brown et al., 2020, Thoppilan et al., 2022,
                                         Bubeck et al., 2023]. Previous studies have shown that pretrained language models store factual
                                         knowledge in parameters [Roberts et al., 2020, Dai et al., 2022a,b, Singhal et al., 2023], demonstrating
                                         considerable potential as assistants for responding to user questions based on their stored knowledge.
                                         Despite the remarkable success of LLMs, critical concerns arise — LLMs often generate unreliable
                                         answers given varying prompts [Ji et al., 2023, Maharana et al., 2023, Chang and Bergen, 2023, Chen
                                         et al., 2023]. As shown in Fig. 1, reliability refers to the ability to consistently generate knowledge-
                                         correct text, posing a higher standard than accuracy. For example, although Alpaca-7B [Taori et al.,
                                         2023] generates accurately (playwright) given a prompt of “William Shakespeare’s job”, it generates
                                         incorrect text (boatman) given a prompt of “the job of Swan of Avon is”1 . ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022]
                                         correctly generates playwright and teacher. However, it answers “No” for the prompt “Is William
                                         Shakespeare a teacher?” In this paper, we assess the knowledge contained in an LLM and investigate
                                         whether an LLM is able to consistently generate factually correct answers given varying prompts.
                                         Knowledge assessment is a critical problem for LLMs. The assessment results directly affect the
                                         people’s trust in the LLM generated content. Once we identify inconsistency of LLM generation,
                                         we could potentially correct such knowledge in LLMs [De Cao et al., 2021, Zhao et al., 2021, Dong
                                         et al., 2022].
                                             1
                                                 Swan of Avon is a nickname of Shakespeare.


                                         37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
William Shakespeare’s job is      Large     a playwright, …   William Shakespeare’s job is      Large     a playwright, …
                                 Language                                                      Language
List the jobs of Swan of Avon:    Model     a boatman, and…   List the jobs of Swan of Avon:    Model     a playwright, and…

                       Accurate but Unreliable                                                 Reliable

Figure 1: Accuracy pertains to generating the correct knowledge in response to a specific prompt,
evaluated as a binary value (correct or incorrect). However, accuracy alone does not ensure reliability,
as responses may vary with different prompt expressions. Reliability requires consistently generating
correct knowledge for semantically similar prompts and is measured as a continuous value. Reliability
sets a higher standard than accuracy by maintaining consistent accuracy across related prompts.

Important steps have been taken in the automatic knowledge evaluation for pre-trained language
models [Petroni et al., 2019, Poerner et al., 2020, Jiang et al., 2020]. However, two issues still remain:
1) Prior methods focus on assessing the accuracy but not the reliability. Consequently, their probing
results are prone to inflation or bias since models exhibit spurious correlations towards specific
prompts [Poerner et al., 2020]. 2) Most prior methods target masked language models (MLMs)
and don’t provide a universal solution for assessing the knowledge in generative LLMs. MLMs are
evaluated by probing whether they predict the masked object in response to a given prompt in cloze
form, while the freely generated results of generative LLMs might be irrelevant to factual knowledge.
Therefore, there is a need for a method that assesses both the accuracy and consistency, i.e. reliability,
of knowledge in LLMs.
In this paper, we introduce KaRR, a statistical approach to assess whether a large language
model contains reliable factual knowledge. We use triplets to represent the probing facts (e.g.
<William_Shakespeare, occupation, Playwright>). Our main idea is to estimate the ratio of
the likelihood of LLM generating correct surface text for ground-truth object entities (Playwright)
given varying prompts with subject entity (William_Shakespeare) and relation (occupation and
the likelihood of generating entity text by pure chances. We distinguish the entities versus their
surface text since each entity and relation may contain several text aliases. We introduce three latent
variables to represent subject, object, and relation, and a Bayesian network to represent the causal
dependency among them and generated text. Our proposed KaRR quantifies the ratio of generating
text with and without a specified relation/subject. This metric effectively captures the combined
impact of both the subject and the relation in determining the model generation probability for the
plausible text of the object (e.g., “playwright”, “dramatist”).
We develop a large-scale assessment suite with 994,123 entities, 600 relations, and their text aliases.
Our suite is orders of magnitude larger than prior studies which only cover very few relations. We
evaluate a comprehensive set of 20 LLMs using our method, including LLaMA [Touvron et al.,
2023a], OPT [Zhang et al., 2022], and others. Moreover, we also invite human experts to assess
knowledge in these LLMs. Results reveal a strong correlation (0.43 Kendall’s τ ) between KaRR and
human evaluation. Our experimental results show that knowledge of LLMs with the same backbone
architecture conforms to the scaling law.
In summary, our contributions are: (1) We propose KaRR, a statistical method to assess the reliable
knowledge contained in LLMs. We present a probabilistic graphical model to tackle varying text
aliases regarding a fact. (2) We develop a large-scale assessment suite with 994,123 entities and 600
relations, which will be released to the community for further study. (3) We conduct a comprehensive
evaluation of 20 LLMs. The experiments show that KaRR exhibits a strong correlation (0.43 Kendall’s
τ ) with human assessment, and achieves a low variance to varying prompts, with a standard deviation
of 0.82. Furthermore, our evaluation results are seldom affected by spurious correlations. Our code
and data are available at https://github.com/dqxiu/KAssess.


2    Related Work

Knowledge Probing Recent studies have demonstrated that language models possess factual
knowledge, which can be utilized for complex reasoning, question answering, and performing
various tasks[Roberts et al., 2020, Choudhary and Reddy, 2023]. To evaluate the knowledge in
language models, previous works implement knowledge probing methods on MLMs. Petroni et al.
[2019] introduces LAMA, studying whether MLMs correctly predict masked object entities in a
cloze-style prompt. However, Elazar et al. [2021] shows that probing outcomes are inconsistent
with various prompts, resulting in contradictory or unreliable results. Shin et al. [2020] show that


                                                              2
                   Relation given                                     Subject given
                  ( , occupation)                               ( , William_Shakespeare)
Subject ( )          worked as a        Object ( )                     Shakespeare         Relation ( )   Object ( )
                 ’s occupation was a                                  Swan of Avon

               Relation not given ( )
                                                      LLM                                                               LLM
                                                                   Subject not given ( )
 Shakespeare                            playwright.                                         worked as a   playwright.
                     married a                                         Shakespeare
Swan of Avon                             dramatist.                                        ’s job was a    dramatist.
    …               worked as a             …                                                   …             …
                                                                     Thomas Edison
                    defended a                                           Lincoln
                        …                                                  …

                                             (a)                                                          (b)

Figure 2: Illustration of KaRR using the fact <William_Shakespeare,occupation,playwright>
as an example. S and R are latent variables representing the subject and relation, respectively; s, r
and o refer to specific values of a subject, relation and object, respectively. (a) illustrates KaRRr ,
which measures the impact of specifying r or not on LLM generating o given s. (b) illustrates KaRRs ,
measuring the impact of specifying s or not on LLM generating o given r.
well-engineered automatic prompts result in much higher results than handcrafted LAMA prompts.
Therefore, ParaRel [Elazar et al., 2021] and LPAQA [Jiang et al., 2020] are proposed for MLMs.
ParaRel measures the knowledge consistency of MLMs through the use of several paraphrased
prompts. Subsequently, Hase et al. [2023] adopt their metric for paraphrase consistency as a measure
of belief, and Raj et al. [2022] extend the metric to measure the general semantic consistency of
OPT [Zhang et al., 2022]. LPAQA focuses on prompts selection and ensembling to improve the
prediction accuracy, by automatically discovering better prompts to query. However, it has not been
comprehensively assessed to what extent LLMs contain knowledge about a fact.
Spurious Correlations in Probing Recent literature reveals that empirical probing results for
masked entities may be affected by spurious correlations within the text [Poerner et al., 2020, Dong
et al., 2022]. Spurious correlations occur when a model takes shortcuts to generate answers based on
superficial information in surface forms, even without possessing relevant knowledge. For instance, a
model with limited knowledge can correctly answer “French” when queried about the native language
of actor “Jean Marais”, simply because “Jean Marais” is a typically French name. This phenomenon
inflates probing results. On the one hand, Zhao et al. [2021] find that probing results are influenced
by contextual biases, and Dong et al. [2022] also note frequency biases in rank-based probing. On
the other hand, the subject’s class has been shown to introduce biases in predictions [Poerner et al.,
2020]. To address these issues, Poerner et al. [2020] eliminate vulnerable relation classes, however,
this approach restricts coverage and does not provide a comprehensive solution. In our statistical
knowledge assessment, we account for both the subject and relation by decomposing their influence
and using multiple aliases to minimize spurious correlations.

3         Statistical Knowledge Assessment
In this section, we present a statistical method for assessing knowledge in LLMs. We begin by
introducing the graphical model for knowledge assessment, which serves as the foundation of our
approach. Subsequently, we introduce the Knowledge Assessment Risk Ratio (KaRR), which we
then convert into a computable form based on the graphical model.
3.1       Graphical Model for Knowledge Assessment

                               Fig. 3 shows the graphical model that describes the knowl-
                               edge symbols and their corresponding text forms. Here, we
   S            𝜶 Text (S)
                               introduce latent variables S, R, and O to represent the sym-
                               bolic subject, relation, and object, respectively. We use s, r,
                               and o to refer to specific values of these variables, and the
  R             𝜷 Text (S,R)
                               triplet (s, r, o) to denote a simple fact/knowledge, such as
                               <William_Shakespeare,occupation,playwright>. We intro-
                𝜸 Text (S,R,O) duce α, β, γ to denote the random variables for the textual forms
  O
                               (textual aliases2 ) of (S), (S, R), (S, R, O), respectively. Here,
Figure 3: Graphical model for α, β, and γ refer to specific values of α, β, and γ, such as α being
knowledge assessment.          expressed as “Shakespeare”.
      2
   “Aliases” are alternative names for entities or relations, defined in Wikidata (https://www.wikidata.org/
wiki/Help:Aliases).


                                                            3
