                                        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




                                        T OEPLITZ N EURAL N ETWORK FOR
                                        S EQUENCE M ODELING
                                                             2
                                                               Zhen Qin 2 Xiaodong Han 3 Weixuan Sun 2 Bowen He 1 Dong Li 3 Dongxu Li
                                                             4
                                                               Yuchao Dai 5 Lingpeng Kong 1 Yiran Zhong∗
                                                             1                             2                         3
                                                               Shanghai AI Laboratory        SenseTime Research        Australian National University
                                                             4                                          5
                                                               Northwestern Polytechnical University      The University of Hong Kong




arXiv:2305.04749v1 [cs.CL] 8 May 2023
                                                                                                                             A BSTRACT

                                                                              Sequence modeling has important applications in natural language processing and
                                                                              computer vision. Recently, the transformer-based models have shown strong per-
                                                                              formance on various sequence modeling tasks, which rely on attention to capture
                                                                              pairwise token relations, and position embedding to inject positional information.
                                                                              While showing good performance, the transformer models are inefficient to scale
                                                                              to long input sequences, mainly due to the quadratic space-time complexity of
                                                                              attention. To overcome this inefficiency, we propose to model sequences with a
                                                                              relative position encoded Toeplitz matrix and use a Toeplitz matrix-vector pro-
                                                                              duction trick to reduce the space-time complexity of the sequence modeling to
                                                                              log linear. A lightweight sub-network called relative position encoder is pro-
                                                                              posed to generate relative position coefficients with a fixed budget of parame-
                                                                              ters, enabling the proposed Toeplitz neural network to deal with varying sequence
                                                                              lengths. In addition, despite being trained on 512-token sequences, our model
                                                                              can extrapolate input sequence length up to 14K tokens in inference with consis-
                                                                              tent performance. Extensive experiments on autoregressive and bidirectional lan-
                                                                              guage modeling, image modeling, and the challenging Long-Range Arena bench-
                                                                              mark show that our method achieves better performance than its competitors in
                                                                              most downstream tasks while being significantly faster. The code is available at
                                                                              https://github.com/OpenNLPLab/Tnn.



                                        1                             I NTRODUCTION

                                                                 75                                                          TNN                   12      Trans              cosFormer         S4
                                                                                                                           S4                              1+elu              Syn(D)            GSS
                                                                                                                                                           Performer          Syn(R)            TNN




                                        Long-Range Arena Score
                                                                 70                                                                                10



                                                                                                                                         Log PPL
                                                                 65                                                                                 8
                                                                                         Transformer-LS Flash        cosFormer
                                                                           Transformer
                                                                 60                                           Reformer       Performer
                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                    Nystorm
                                                                 55
                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                 50                                                      Fnet
                                                                       2        4        6      8     10        12    14    16                          2000   4000    6000     8000      10000 12000 14000
                                                                                          Speed (steps per sec)                                                        Inference length
                                        Figure 1: The left figure shows the training speed (x-axis), performances (y-axis), and GPU memory
                                        footprints (circle sizes) of the TNN and competing methods on Long-Range Arena benchmark. The
                                        TNN beats the competitors with a clear margin. The right figure plots the extrapolation results with
                                        different sequence lengths, where the x-axis denotes sequence lengths, and the y-axis denotes log
                                        PPL. It demonstrates that regardless of the sequence length, the PPL of the TNN remains constant.

                                                                 ∗
                                                                      Indicates the corresponding author. Email: zhongyiran@gmail.com


                                                                                                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




Sequence modeling is a fundamental problem in natural language processing, speech processing,
and computer vision. Various sequence modeling methods have been proposed in the literature,
including recurrent (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), convolutional architectures (LeCun et al.,
1989), and transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). These models utilize various properties of sequential
data for their modeling. For example, recurrent models (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) mimic
the sequential property by sequentially processing the input while maintaining hidden states through
steps. Convolutional models (LeCun et al., 1989) enforce the locality bias sequentially and only in-
teract elements within local patches. Transformers use attention matrices to model pairwise relations
regardless of the distance between them. Recently, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021) show strong performance on a wide range of applications across domains and become
arguably one of the most successful architectures for sequence modeling in general.
There are two main components in transformers: the attention mechanism that learns pairwise
correlations of tokens from data, and the position embedding to introduce positional inductive bi-
ases. The vanilla attention mechanism requires quadratic space-time complexity, which precludes
Transformers from handling long sequences. Numerous attention variants have been proposed re-
cently to reduce the complexity, including linear transformers (Katharopoulos et al., 2020), and
Performer (Choromanski et al., 2021). Although the types of attention vary, the position embedding
remains in every method, which indicates the importance of position information in sequence mod-
eling. This motivates us to ask the following question: since position information is important, can
we design a model that relies entirely on the position information of its elements regardless of their
content, thus alleviating the quadratic computation cost of the vanilla attention mechanism?
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer to this question by introducing Toeplitz neural network,
a new efficient architecture that solely exploits relative position relations for sequence modeling. In
specific, instead of attention matrices, the Toeplitz neural network uses Toeplitz matrices to capture
relations between each token pair. There are two motivations for selecting the Toeplitz matrix.
One is that it compactly represents relative positional relations between tokens with much fewer
parameters, i.e., 2n − 1 parameters for an n × n Toeplitz matrix. The other is that the Toeplitz
matrix-vector production can be efficiently processed in O(n log n) complexity, which is exactly
what we used in our token mixing operation. In this way, we avoid computing content similarities
between tokens and effectively reduce the quadratic computation complexity of transformers to log
linear, rendering a more efficient sequence modeling architecture.
We further propose relative position encoder, a lightweight module that generates relative posi-
tion parameters to assemble the Toeplitz matrices, so that the number of the TNN’s parameters
will no longer depend on the sequence length. Moreover, it allows TNN to deal with varying se-
quence lengths without retraining. In addition, the input sequence length extrapolation becomes an
important ability in sequence modeling as training on longer sequences can be prohibitively expen-
sive (Press et al., 2022). We propose an exponential decay bias that directly applies to the Toeplitz
matrix. Our model achieves a consistent performance to a sequence length of 14K tokens in infer-
ence when training on sequences of 512 tokens. We also show analytically that the Toeplitz neural
network represents a general form of sequence modeling methods, and derives transformers, CNNs,
and the recently proposed State-space-based methods (Gu et al., 2022) as its special forms.
We validate our model on a wide range of sequence modeling tasks and benchmarks. These include
auto-regressive language modeling, text classification, image classification, and the Long-Range
Arena benchmark. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on most
tasks at a favorable log linear space-time complexity. It also demonstrates superior extrapolation
capabilities when training on shorter sequences and evaluating on longer ones off-the-shelf.


2   P RELIMINARY
In this section, we introduce concepts used throughout the paper, including positional embedding,
token and channel mixing, and the Toeplitz matrix. Notations used can be found in Appendix A.
Positional embedding is introduced in transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) to inject positional in-
ductive bias. It often uses fixed or learned parameters to encode position-specific information, thus
making the model position-aware. There are mainly two types of positional embeddings: the abso-
lute positional embedding (Vaswani et al., 2017) and the relative position embedding (Shaw et al.,
2018). In this work, we focus on the relative position embedding to emphasize pair-wise token


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




relations. A typical relative positional embedding (Raffel et al., 2020) is formulated as:
                                                    √
                                       eij = q>
                                              i kj / d + wi−j ,                                       (1)

where j, i are two positional indices, eij denotes the attention score before softmax. The qi , kj
represents the queries and keys in the attention. The wi−j is a positional coefficient. In this case,
the relative position information is added to the attention as a bias.
Token and channel mixing are used by (Yu et al., 2022) to refer to the two main procedures in
sequence modeling. The token mixing refers to the process of mixing information between token
pairs and the channel mixing for those between feature channels. In the Transformers, given the
attention matrix A ∈ Rn×n and token matrix X ∈ Rn×d , the attention operation AX can be
regarded as a token mixing process and the FFN module is used for channel mixing.
Researchers often classify various sequence modeling techniques based on the token mixing tech-
niques used. MLP-based methods (Liu et al., 2021; Tolstikhin et al., 2021) use matrix multiplication
on the sequence dimension for token mixing. FFT-based methods (Lee-Thorp et al., 2022) utilize
the FFT on the sequence dimension to mix token-wise information. The State-space-based meth-
ods (Gu et al., 2022) leverage the state equations and hidden states to model sequences, as well as
perform interactions between tokens.
Toeplitz matrix is a special form of a matrix that has constant values along each diagonal running
from left to right, i.e.,
                                 Tij = Ti+1,j+1 = ti−j , T ∈ Rn×n .                                   (2)

There are two nice properties of a Toeplitz matrix: 1). For an n×n Toeplitz matrix, we can efficiently
describe it with 2n − 1 parameters. 2). The Toeplitz matrix-vector production is faster than standard
matrix-vector production. In particular, we have:
Theorem 2.1. For a Toeplitz matrix T ∈ Rn×n and any vector x ∈ Rn , the time complexity of Tx
is O(n log n).

We provide detailed proof in Appendix B. This property enables us to use the Toeplitz matrices to
perform efficient token mixing.


3     T OEPLITZ NEURAL NETWORK
In this section, we provide a detailed design and analysis of our proposed Toeplitz Neural Network
(TNN) by giving a glance at the overall structure of our model first and then describing each of
its components. We also discuss the connection between the TNN and other sequence modeling
methods at the end of this section.

3.1   T HE OVERALL ARCHITECTURE

Our model consists of a stack of Gated Toeplitz Units (GTU) and GLU (Shazeer, 2020). GTU is
a modified GLU layer injected with the proposed Toeplitz Neural Operator (TNO), as illustrated in
Fig. 2. A TNO is used to perform token mixing with a Toeplitz matrix. To generate relative position
coefficients for the Toeplitz matrix, we propose a Relative Position Encoder (RPE), a lightweight
fully-connected sub-network to encode the relative position information. An exponential decay bias
is also added to the Toeplitz matrix to enable extrapolation on longer inputs.

3.2   T OEPLITZ NEURAL OPERATOR

Here, we will show how to use a Toeplitz matrix to represent relative positional information. Let us
consider i, j to be two positions in a 1D sequence, by using the relative position embedding in Eq. 1,
we can define a Toeplitz matrix T ∈ Rn×n , where Tij = ti−j . Specifically, given a sequence x
of n tokens, x = [x0 , x1 , . . . , xn−1 ]> ∈ Rn , we use a scalar ti−j to represent the relative position
coefficients between xi and xj . Then a Toeplitz matrix T ∈ Rn×n can be formed by gathering ti−j


                                                    3
